

Sovereign WORLDWIDE •INCLUDING AMERICA •LUXURY HOTELS •CRUISES •SAFARIS •TOURS •FLY DRIVE NOVEMBER 1989/NOVEMBER 1990 REDWING HOLIDAYS
This year Sovereign has even more surprises in store…a world of fascination in lands beyond the sea awaits you with our new Worldwide programme.
To experience the exciting cultures, fascinating people and exotic cuisine of different lands is something to remember forever.
And who better to travel with than Sovereign, whose high standards and insistence on quality is well-known?
Thailand, Malaysia, India, Canada, New England, Kenya, Jamaica and Florida are just a handful of the places we have chosen for our impressive 1990 programme.
From the Far East to the Americas and the Caribbean, come and discover this wonderful world with Sovereign.
NEW!
Sovereign's line-up of new destinations includes three idyllic Grenadine Islands, our special Caribbean hideaways, and the lush Hawaiian island of Kauai, as well as a completely new range of US and Canadian tours, a Kashmir encounter, a cruise around the Caribbean and a breath-taking balloon safari in Kenya.
GETTING THE BEST FROM SOVEREIGN
THE SOVEREIGN PRICE PLEDGE
We are hopeful that there will be no surcharges levied whatsoever on the cost of your holiday — but obviously fuel costs, currency movements and governmental action are outside our control, and there is only so much that we are able to absorb.
Please refer to our Booking Conditions for full details.
SOVEREIGN CARE AND RELIABILITY
All of our travel arrangements (except the charter services to Kenya, Egypt, Florida and Thailand) are based on the scheduled services of major international airlines from and to Heathrow, Gatwick and Manchester; many services are by British Airways.
It means that we can guarantee you the very finest standards of organisation, care and comfort.
The Sovereign standard in fact.
Where we do use another airline, either from or to the UK, you will find details in the appropriate price panels or itineraries.
It may also occasionally be necessary, for operational reasons, to substitute an aircraft operated by another airline and we reserve the right.
When you arrive at your destination you will be met (unless otherwise stated) by one of our local representatives who, with their local knowledge, are available to offer friendly advice and help with excursions and car hire.
They will not intrude on your holiday, but should you require their services, you know they're within easy reach and where and how to contact them.
FLIGHT INFORMATION SERVICE
The majority of holiday flights depart and arrive on schedule.
However, there are occasions when, due to reasons beyond our control, flights are delayed.
In order to reduce any inconvenience caused by such delays we have introduced our special regularly updated Flight Information Service which monitors any major disruptions to flight schedules.
For details of how to get up to the minute information on both DEPARTURES and ARRIVALS from your local airport ring the following Index Line: 0836 402770 (Call charged at 25p per minute cheap rate, 38p per minute at all other times).
WHAT THE SOVEREIGN PRICE INCLUDES
Return flights as specified in the price panels.
In-flight meals and/or refreshments as appropriate to the time of day.
A baggage allowance, variable from one destination to another.
Sovereign advise you to confirm the allowance applicable to your destination with our Reservations Department or your travel agent.
Transfers between overseas airport and hotel, unless otherwise stated.
Please note: all holidays to Florida include a hire car, collectable on your arrival.
Transfers can still be arranged however for an additional charge.
Please see pages 70–71 for further details.
Accommodation and meals as confirmed on your final invoice.
All obligatory hotel service charges and taxes.
The services of a Sovereign representative or local agent (unless otherwise stated).
Sovereign Worldwide travel bag per booking.
Sovereign Holiday Guide and (to most destinations) Berlitz Travel Guide (one per booking)
AIRPORT TAXES
Although airport taxes are not levied against passengers using Heathrow, some airports overseas do impose a nominal charge to be paid locally, which is NOT included in your holiday price.
As these charges are subject to change from time to time, you may wish to ask our Reservations Department for the latest information near to the time of your departure.
TROPICAL ISLAND WEDDINGS
If you're planning to get married why not ‘take the plunge’ on a tropical island where you won't have to worry about the weather!
For a small charge of £30 per booking, Sovereign can arrange your wedding in Jamaica, Mauritius, the Seychelles and Antigua — just ask our Reservations Department for details.
SOVEREIGN ALL-INCLUSIVE
Many of our featured Caribbean hotels are all-inclusive properties — everything is paid for prior to departure.
Look for the special ‘Sovereign All-Inclusive’ symbol in the brochure.
Umbrella factory at Chiang Mai, Thailand
BRITISH AIRWAYS FIRST CLASS AND CLUB WORLD
On holidays featuring British Airways flights, you can make your holiday even more special by flying First Class or Club World — please call our Reservations Department for details.
SOVEREIGN VALUE
To get the best value on your holiday, take a look at the ‘Sovereign Value’ boxes which appear throughout the brochure.
At many of our featured hotels, Sovereign clients can take advantage of special offers such as 3 weeks for the price of 2, free watersports and upgraded accommodation — all extra value from your Sovereign holiday.
Please note: Extra week offers are only applicable to basic room only; any supplements for single rooms, full board etc. are payable on the whole holiday (extra week included) and will be automatically added to your invoice.
DISCOUNTS FOR CHILDREN
Sovereign offers generous child reductions at most hotels, providing the child is sharing the parents' room.
For infants under the age of 2 years (on the date of their return flight), we make a nominal charge of £65 for travel and for providing a cot, and you settle directly with the hotel for food and any other extras.
Details of our reductions for children are given in the price panels, and are applied to the basic holiday price shown, before adding any room, meal or flight supplements.
TWO CENTRE HOLIDAYS
To make the most of your longhaul holiday, why not combine a stay in one resort with a stay in another and really get the best of both worlds?
Look for the Sovereign ‘Two Centre’ panels throughout the brochure for more details.
To calculate the additional cost of a 2 week two centre holiday, simply add both the two week costs shown in the price panels, divide by two, then add £80 per person travelling.
This covers both administration and transfer costs, and is not refundable.
Your holiday price includes transfers, accommodation and meals as shown in each hotel description.
ON A SHOESTRING
Our ‘Shoestring’ properties tend to be smaller and less grand than most of the larger resort hotels, and are an excellent choice if you're looking for a more ‘ethnic’type of holiday.
The hotels themselves have a basic range of facilities, and the rooms are simply yet adequately furnished.
Look for the special ‘Sovereign on a Shoestring’ symbol as you browse through the brochure.
A THIRD PERSON SHARING
When three adults wish to share a holiday, Sovereign helps to cut the cost.
At most of our hotels, we offer a discount for a third adult when three adults share a three-bedded room.
Please check our price panels for the savings.
SOVEREIGN PEACE OF MIND
In your own interests, we insist that you are insured against accidents, medical treatment and expenses, cancellation or curtailment of your holiday, loss of baggage and money, personal liability and other unforeseen eventualities.
To help you guard against a ruined holiday, we have negotiated a comprehensive policy, which we believe represents the finest cover available.
For full details see page 99.
CINDERELLA'S CASTLE, DISNEYWORLD, FLORIDA ©1989 THE WALT DISNEY COMPANY
ST GEORGE'S, GRENADA
SOVEREIGN VALUE BEFORE YOU GO
AIR MILES…
SAVING ON YOUR HOLIDAY HAS NEVER BEEN EASIER!
Air Miles and Sovereign have joined forces to bring you the best quality holiday at reduced prices…all you have to do is go shopping!
The idea is simple: masses of shops and services throughout mainland Britain are giving away Air Miles vouchers to customers spending money.
It's just a matter of hoarding them for a discount on your Sovereign holiday.
Every time you spend your cash on particular products or services in any one of the participating outlets, you will receive a number of Air Miles vouchers depending on just how much you spend.
Your shopping receipts will suddenly take on a new significance!
Save Air Miles tokens and make your Sovereign holiday something to really write home about — 1000 Air Miles vouchers entitle you to a whopping £60 off any holiday in this brochure.
THE SOVEREIGN BONUS
Included in your holiday price is a smart Sovereign Worldwide travel bag which, when not in use, can be folded away into a neat 8½″ by 8½″ square by zipping the ends together.
This handy bag is made of a strong, lightweight nylon material.
In addition, to help you get the most out of your holiday, we will also be sending Berlitz Travel Guides to all Sovereign clients taking a holiday in the following destinations: Antigua, Bahamas, Bali, Barbados, California, Egypt, Florida, Grenada, The Grenadines, Hawaii, Hong Kong, India, Jamaica, Kenya, the Maldives, Penang, St. Lucia, Seychelles, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand.
The above items will be sent to you (one per booking) with your travel documents which include our specially prepared Holiday Guide which contains everything you need to know before departure (including details of hotels and car parks close to the airport).
BRITISH RAIL TO LONDON — £25 FIRST CLASS RETURN
You may wish to take advantage of our special arrangement with British Rail, entitling you to first class return rail travel from your home town anywhere in mainland England, Scotland or Wales to Gatwick Airport.
The fare you pay is a flat rate £25 — a fraction of the normal return fare!
Travel to Gatwick from outside London also includes the Underground from Victoria and the Gatwick Express Rail Service (every 15 minutes throughout the day) right into the heart of the airport.
To take advantage of this special Sovereign offer, simply indicate when booking how many tickets you require, together with the name of your home station and your destination.
Conditions:
1.
The ticket price of £25 return (adult or child over 5 years) is only valid when used in conjunction with a Sovereign Worldwide holiday.
2.
The ticket provides for first class return rail travel, but if you wish to make seat reservations or book sleepers, you must arrange this yourself through your travel agent or directly with British Rail and pay any extra charges.
Sovereign is not able to assist with enquiries relating to rail timetables.
3.
Sovereign cannot be held responsible for any train delays, strikes, cancellations or consequential claims arising from such circumstances.
4.
The train ticket is not refundable (unless no train operates on your date of travel) and is not transferable.
5.
We regret that we are unable to provide this rail fare facility for clients booking within one week of departure.
6.
This offer is only valid for return travel before 30th April 1990.
UK DOMESTIC FLIGHT CONNECTIONS TO HEATHROW
If you are booking a holiday based on intercontinental British Airways flights from and to London Heathrow or London Gatwick, Sovereign can offer you return flights from Manchester, Newcastle, Jersey, Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen or Belfast.
If you require a domestic connecting flight with either British Airways or any other airline, please contact our Reservations Department for details and prices and they will be happy to arrange it.
PHI PHI ISLAND, THAILAND
FESTIVALS
Throughout the world, a host of festivals and special events are constantly taking place.
Each country celebrates with its own unique style and enthusiasm: Sovereign have researched some of the best of these, so that if any take your fancy you can coincide your trip with them.
THAILAND
Thailand is at its most vibrant during major festivals such as the lively New Year celebrations, which see in each year with beauty parades, dancing and water throwing.
The blazing Flower Carnival in Chiang Mai in early February is a visual treat, and there are colourful parades and processions accompanying both the King's and Queen's Birthdays in December and August respectively.
In Bangkok each November, the Low Krathong is a solemn festival where local wrap a candle, incense, flowers and a coin in banana skins to attract good fortune for the approaching new year.
INDIA
India has many expressions of culture in its numerous festivals and celebrations.
Republic Day in January is celebrated all over India and in the grandest style!
In the capital there's a magnificent parade of roughly caparisoned elephants, floats and costumed walkers, culminating in a fly-past decorating the sky with the colours of the national flag.
Holi, the Festival of Colour is celebrated with the advent of spring in India.
Men, women and children throw coloured water and red ‘gulai’ at their friends, so it is not a good idea to wear your best clothes!
SINGAPORE
The Chinese New Year is celebrated in Singapore each February with a multitude of festivities, culminating with the Chingay Procession, originally a Chinese affair but now truly reflecting Singapore's multi-racial heritage.
Other festivals include the Dragon Boat Festival in June, and the Autumn Mooncake Festival, as well as the National Day with its parades through the city.
Students dress in colourful garb for the display to show their allegiance to Singapore.
MALAYSIA
Due to her cultural diversity, Malaysia has a wealth of festivals throughout the year.
One of the most colourful is in October, when the Festival of Nine Emperors is celebrated with 9 days of processions and Chinese operas culminating in a dramatic firewalking ceremony on the eve of the ninth day.
1990 is ‘Visit Malaysia Year’ which brings with it a year of festivals and celebrations.
See pages 19–21 for further details.
HONG KONG
At midnight on New Year's Eve on the harbour, all the ships sound their foghorns as the Noon Day Gun booms.
The visitor to Hong Kong is able to experience an appealing combination of cultural and sporting events, including the Festival of Asian Arts which occurs during autumn, and the Mid Autumn Festival, when families cluster around candles and lanterns under the full moon.
In spring, Hong Kong's close links with the sea are celebrated during the Festival of Tin Hau — Goddess of the Sea and Fishermen.
And for the sporting enthusiast, autumn is when the horse racing season commences, plus the Hong Kong Tennis Classic in late October and the Macau Grand prix.
USA
Easter in the United States is a time for dressing up; Easter bonnets and egg hunts are surprisingly popular.
But the biggest celebration of the year is the 4th of July, Independence Day.
Patriots march to brass bands, and firework displays are held in most cities.
Over Christmas and the New Year, the best place to be is Disneyworld in Florida for truly magical celebrations.
Enjoy the festivities in the company of your favourite Walt Disney characters.
INDONESIA
The festival of Sekaten is marked by a week of playing sacred musical instruments called gamelans, brought in procession to the Grand Mosque — a colourful and tuneful display.
This is but a small selection of events and festivals taking place in a few of our worldwide destinations — an ideal and enjoyable way to appreciate the culture and local traditions in each country.
For further details on these events and information on other countries featured in this brochure, Sovereign recommends that you contact the appropriate National Tourist Office who are always pleased to help.
Have fun!
DRAGON BOAT FESTIVAL
ELEPHANT PROCESSION, BANGKOK
STRAW BIRD FESTIVAL, THAILAND
TIN HAU FESTIVAL, HONG KONG
THE FAR EAST
THAILAND
Evoking memories of the glorious days of old Siam, Thailand basks in the glory of its rich past, magnificent scenery and friendly natives.
Capital of the country, Bangkok's appeal is timeless, with its fascinating array of lavish temples, palaces and gardens, as well as the fast-moving night-life which has to be experienced to be believed!
Visit Phuket, Koh Samui and Pattaya, three beachside idylls where the living is easy and the scenery perennially beautiful.
On the more serious side, make a pilgrimage to the infamous ‘Death Railway’ in the River Kwai Valley where thousands lost their lives during the Second World War.
It's all to be found within the borders of Thailand…a country rich in history, blessed with sun-drenched beaches and filled with charming people.
SOVEREIGN GOLD SERVICE
On all our Boeing 757 charter flights to Thailand, we offer the Sovereign Gold Service in the front section of the aircraft.
This includes:
3 seats for 2 passengers.
In order to give you more comfort and privacy during your flight, the middle seat in each row of 3 will not be occupied.
Free bar offering wine and soft drinks.
Upgraded meal service.
Free newspapers.
Free amenity pack.
Separate check-in at London Gatwick.
20 kilos baggage allowance.
Supplement for the Sovereign Gold Service is £149 per person one way.
Bangkok
An ancient city which has plunged right into the midst of the twentieth century, Bangkok is a fascinating mixture of ancient and modern values — noisy markets right next to the high walls of turreted royal palaces, serene gardens overlooked by modern hotels and the notorious Phatphong Road for discos, massage parlours and outrageous floorshows.
The Grand Palace dominates the city, with its gleaming spires piercing the skyline and its Buddha statues gazing serenely into space.
Capture the feeling of the city from the network of canals which thread their way through the city, visit some of the hundreds of temples which are scattered everywhere, and don't miss the bustling floating markets.
NARAI HOTEL Bangkok
Conveniently located on Silom Road with easy access to major commercial, shopping and entertainment centres, the Narai is an informal hotel with good facilities.
Dining is especially good at this hotel, with a choice of pasta dishes, international buffets or French cuisine in a revolving restaurant — it helps to make the meal go round!
Swimming pool
Bars
3 restaurants
24 hour coffee shop
Gift shops
Hairdressers
All rooms have air-conditioning, colour television and mini-bar.
No. of rooms: 500
HOTEL MANHATTAN Bangkok
Elegance and style characterise this informal hotel, located right in the middle of Bangkok.
The Manhattan's friendly service is complemented by the comfortable restaurant, cafe and cocktail lounge, whose friendly ambience is popular with guests.
Swimming pool
Restaurant
Cafe
Cocktail lounge
Nightclub
24 hour room service
All rooms have air-conditioning, television, refrigerator and telephone.
No. of rooms: 210 
GRAND PALACE
FLOATING MARKET
SOVEREIGN VALUE
HONEYMOONERS
Hotel: Narai Hotel
Honeymooners receive  complimentary fruit and flowers on arrival.
SOLO VALUE
Hotel: Asia Hotel
No supplement for singles on arrivals between 1 May–30 September.
HOTEL ASIA Bangkok
Close to the shopping and entertainment areas, the Asia Hotel is a superbly decorated hotel with many excellent features.
Apart from guest rooms fitted to a very high standard and a variety of bars and lounges to relax in, the hotel has a range of dining possibilities, from Japanese and Chinese cuisine to grilled specialities and American style fast food.
2 swimming pools
2 restaurants
Grill room
Fast food centre
Tivoli Coffee Shop
Lobby bar
Velvet Cocktail Lounge
Tennis court
Health club including gym, sauna and massage
Cabaret nightclub
All rooms are air-conditioned with telephone, television, video, radio and refrigerator.
No. of rooms: 650
THE ORIENTAL Bangkok
Listed as one of the world's finest hotels, and in a beautiful position overlooking the Chao Phya River, the Oriental is one of the oldest and most famous hotels in the East.
All bedrooms are spacious and impeccably decorated, and the hotel's swift and efficient service is renowned.
Swimming pool
Restaurants
Coffee shop
Bar
Sports complex
Squash
Tennis
Sauna
Disco
All rooms have air-conditioning and colour television.
No. of rooms: 400
DUSIT THANI Bangkok
Well located at the top of Silom Road overlooking Lumpini Park, this hotel makes access to all the city's many attractions easy.
Drinks, cocktails and afternoon tea are served in the library, with its views of the hotel's lovely hanging gardens, and you can also enjoy a drink in the Tiara Lounge or dance the night away at Bubbles, one of the city's most exciting discos.
Swimming pool
6 restaurants
Coffee shop
Bars
International entertainment
Health club with tennis and squash
Sauna
Beauty parlour
Shopping arcades
Disco.
No. of rooms: 525 
DAMNOEN SADUAK FLOATING MARKET
GRAND PALACE
HOTEL ASIA
SUMMER PALACE BANG PA IN
DUSIT THANI
ONE OF BANGKOK'S MANY KLONGS
RIVER KWAI
3 days/2 nights
Taking in the picturesque River Kwai Valley, including the war cemetery at Kanchanaburi, the celebrated bridge, Kaeng Lava Cave, the waterfalls of Sai Yok Yai, a journey on the ‘Death Railway’ and a river cruise.
Excursion no: EX1
Excursion prices are Bangkok to Bangkok.
An allowance is made for unused hotel accommodation in Bangkok.
Refer to our Reservations Department for details.
GOLDEN TRIANGLE
5 days/4 nights
Visit the Golden Triangle on the Mekong River on the borders of Thailand, Laos and Burma.
The tour includes boat trips along the Kok and Mekong Rivers, visits to a handicraft village, the gold studded temples of the region, hill tribe villages and their local markets and the Chiang Mai night market.
Excursion no: EX2
Excursion prices are Bangkok to Bangkok.
An allowance is made for unused hotel accommodation in Bangkok.
Refer to our Reservations Department for details.
HILL TRIBE DANCE
GRAND PALACE
WAT PHRADHATU-DOISUTHER, CHIANG MAI
YEO TRIBE, NEAR CHIANG RAI
ERAWAN SHRINE, BANGKOK
RIVER KWAI — DEATH RAILWAY ENGINE
PATTAYA
Once a tiny fishing village, this town has blossomed into the country's most popular beach resort, with people taking full advantage of the excellent beaches and vibrant nightlife.
By day you can waterski, windsurf, parasail or take a trip in a fishing boat to one of the outlying islands; by night, enjoy a leisurely drink in an open-air bar or dance the night away in some pulsating disco.
Pattaya is approximately 2 hours' drive from Bangkok on the Gulf of Siam.
DUSIT RESORT Pattaya
A deluxe hotel enjoying a peaceful location and overlooking the wide expanse of the Gulf of Siam, the Dusit Resort is a stunning complex which allows you to enjoy the many benefits of its beachside location, without foregoing comfort and top-class service.
A vast range of sporting and restaurant choices are to be had and complement the excellence of service and attention to detail throughout the hotel.
2 swimming pools
Restaurants
Cocktail lounge
3 tennis courts
2 air-conditioned squash courts
Snooker room
Sauna
Fitness centre
Golf courses nearby
Live entertainment
Gala dinner on New Year's Eve is included in the price.
No. of rooms: 500
SOVEREIGN TWO-CENTRE
BANGKOK/PATTAYA
Combine the excitement of a week in Bangkok with a week relaxing on a beach in Pattaya.
See pages 10–11 for descriptions of our Bangkok hotels.
JOMTIEN BEACH, PATTAYA
ON A SHOESTRING
INN OF THE GOLDEN CRAB Pattaya
The Inn of the Golden Crab is a small, attractive complex of 20 apartments located about one hundred yards from the beach.
Although quiet and secluded, the inn is only a ten minute stroll away from the excitement of the ‘Strip’, and is the perfect base for the independent holidaymaker.
Swimming pool
Sun terrace
TV and video
Coffee shop/bar
Ships close by
Kitchen with 2 ring gas cooker and refrigerator
Welcome starter pack of groceries
Laundry service
Electricity is payable locally
All rooms have air-conditioning.
No. of apartments: 16
ORCHID LODGE Pattaya
Set in over 16 acres of lush, tropical gardens and enjoying a quiet location, the Orchid Lodge is now one of the older-established beach hotels in Pattaya and a particular favourite with British visitors.
The main beach is just across the seafront road, and boat trips to the lovely coral island beaches nearby can be arranged.
Swimming pool
Open-air lounge
Bar
Restaurants
Children's playground
Badminton
Floodlit tennis courts
Gold and riding available nearby.
No. of rooms: 234
SIAM BAYVIEW Pattaya
Located within walking distance of the heart of Pattaya and facing the Gulf of Siam, the Siam Bayview has been designed to provide its guests with all the facilities for an enjoyable holiday.
In a beautiful setting of landscaped gardens, the hotel has comfortably appointed bedrooms, a number of eating places and a host of watersporting opportunities.
2 swimming pools
3 restaurants
Bar
Tennis courts
Watersports
All rooms have air-conditioning, private bathroom and mini-bar.
Gala dinner on New Year's Eve is included in the price.
No. of rooms: 270
ROYAL CLIFF BEACH RESORT Pattaya
On the outskirts of Pattaya, this hotel is surrounded by its own beautiful gardens with its own secluded sandy beach.
The facilities offered by this fine hotel range from a choice of restaurants and bars to a shopping village and even a resident tennis coach.
The addition of the Royal Wing has resulted in an even more impressive range of accommodation, with beautifully decorated suites and personalised service.
3 swimming pools
Bars
Restaurants
Pool bar
Tennis club
6 floodlit tennis courts
Health club
Sauna.
Watersports
Shopping village
All rooms and suites have mini-bar and 24 hour room service.
No. of rooms: 550 
No. of suites: 170
Orchid Lodge
Royal Cliff Beach Resort
Refreshments of Jomtien Beach
KOH SAMUI
A coconut covered island 700 km due south of Bangkok, Koh Samui is one of Thailand's quieter seaside resorts.
Nestling off the east coast of Thailand, the island offers 247 square kilometres of forested hills, deserted coves and wide, sandy beaches just waiting to be enjoyed.
The island's best beaches lie along the norther and eastern coasts with plenty of sand to choose from.
Rent a jeep to get out onto small tracks which uncover some beautiful waterfalls and rock formations.
ON A SHOESTRING
CHENGMON VILLAGE Koh Samui
Under the same management as the Village and White House, the delightful Chengmon Village is on a beautiful beach, a perfect place for a get away from it all holiday.
Accommodation at the hotel is in thatched bungalows scattered throughout the native gardens, with superior bungalows providing an extra degree of luxury and well worth the additional supplement.
Swimming pool
Gardens
Open-air restaurant
Beach bar
Watersports including waterskiing and windsurfing available nearby.
No. of bungalows: 23 
SOVEREIGN TWO-CENTRE
BANGKOK/THAI BEACH
Combine the excitement of a week in Bangkok with the serenity of Cha Am, Hua Hin or Koh Samui.
See pages 10–11 for descriptions of our Bangkok hotels.
THE VILLAGE AND THE WHITEHOUSE Koh Samui
Tranquil and relaxing, the small but delightful Village and Whitehouse hotels are located about 800 metres apart, on the unspoilt Chaweng Beach amid beautiful gardens.
Accommodation is within traditionally-styled bungalows scattered throughout the grounds, all east facing to catch the superb sunrise.
Close by the complex are several restaurants and, of course, the superb beach from which boat rides to other islands can be taken.
Restaurants
Bars
Lounge
Surfing, motorboats, snorkelling available locally at extra charge
Bicycles and jeeps available for hire at extra charge
Souvenir shop nearby
All rooms have ceiling fan and terrace with a sea or garden view.
No. of rooms: 19 (The Village)
10 including 2 suites (The Whitehouse)
SAMUI PALM BEACH Koh Samui
In an idyllic location on the beautiful Bo Phut Bay, the Palm Beach is aptly named with more than 4 acres of coconut palms along the glorious beachfront.
Relaxation is a keynote at this friendly hotel, with its native style bungalows shielded by swaying palms.
Restaurant
Bar
Watersports
Room service
Laundry
All rooms have piped music, telephone, video, television and mini-bar.
No. of rooms: 50 
CHA AM & HUA HIN
A hundred and fifty miles south of Bangkok (approximately 3 hours drive) are the peaceful resorts of Hua Hin and Cha Am, dreamy beach resorts with plenty of soft, white sand and clear blue water.
Originally a small fishing town, Hua Hin's tranquil appeal was discovered by Thailand's King Rama VII in the late 1920s and is still the royal family's vacation retreat.
Reminders of the town's great past are everywhere — the old palace, the railway station's royal waiting room and the lovely beach promenade.
Despite the peacefulness of the waterfront, the town is still a bustling fishing port and has many good restaurants and a lively night market.
Just a little to the north, the sleepy resort of Cha Am is set on a beautiful stretch of secluded beach, boasting crystal-clear waters lapping onto pristine golden sands.
The pace of life is slow here, with only one hotel in sight and a small handful of unpretentious restaurants which prepare a delicious seafood fare.
ROYAL GARDEN RESORT Hua Hin
A lovely hotel built around its own swimming pool right on the beautiful beach, the Royal Garden Resort is just a few minutes' trishaw ride from the town.
Four restaurants, a bar and disco ensure that evenings are memorable, with an impressive range of sporting facilities to fill in the long, warm days.
A complimentary shuttle bus service operates between the Royal Garden Resort and the Royal Garden Village to allow guests to enjoy the facilities of both hotels.
Swimming pool
Restaurants
Bars
Cocktail lounge
Jacuzzi
Tennis courts
Golf course nearby
Bicycles for hire
Entertainment
Disco
Sailing
Waterskiing
Parasailing
Sovereign guests receive free welcome drink and fruit basket in their room
All rooms are sea facing.
No. of rooms: 220
ROYAL GARDEN VILLAGE Hua Hin
This exciting, first-class resort features an impeccable standard of accommodation in traditional Thai style, in luxurious surroundings.
Set in 14 acres of gardens fronting a beautiful beach, the Village features a small cluster of Thai-style houses with luxurious bedrooms and apartments, as well as the largest swimming pool in Thailand.
Swimming pool
Restaurants
Bars
Pool bar
Shops
Tennis courts
Watersports
Golf course nearby
Sovereign clients receive a free welcome drink and fruit basket in their room.
No. of rooms: 164
SOVEREIGN VALUE
FREE WEEK: 3 for 2
Hotel: Royal Garden Village
Stay two weeks and have an extra week free on room only basis for arrivals between 1 May–31 October.
Hotel: Royal Garden Resort
Stay 2 weeks and have an extra week free on room only basis for arrivals between 1 May–31 October.
FREE WEEK: 2 for 1
Hotel: Royal Garden Village
Stay 1 week and have an extra week free on room only basis for arrivals between 1 May–31 October.
Hotel: Regent Cha Am
Stay 1 week and receive an extra week free on room only basis for arrivals between 1 May–31 October.
Hotel: Royal Garden Resort
Stay 1 week and have an extra week free on room only basis for arrivals between 1 May–31 October.
Hotel: Samui Palm Beach
Stay 1 week and have an extra week free on room only for arrivals between 1 June–31 September.
Half board for second week is compulsory and payable locally.
HONEYMOONERS:
Hotel: Royal Garden Village
Honeymooners receive a free bottle of champagne, fruit basket and room upgrade (subject to availability).
Hotel: Regent Cha Am
Honeymooners receive complementary fruit, flowers and cake on arrival.
Hotel: Royal Garden Resort
Honeymooners receive complementary bottle of champagne, fruit basket and room upgrade (subject to availability).
THE BEACH AT HUA HIN
PHUKET
Unspoilt and peaceful, the island of Phuket is some 400 miles south of Bangkok, a relaxing getaway from the bustle of the big city.
Magnificent beaches, clear waters and endless sunshine characterise this glorious island, popular with sun lovers but still forgotten enough in parts to be tranquil and deserted.
Make the most of the stunning beaches on the west coast, and don't miss the local Crocodile Farm!
REGENT HOTEL Cha Am
Amid 40 acres of tropical greenery, the Regent overlooks 4 miles of deserted beach on the tranquil Gulf of Thailand.
With everything you could possibly desire to make your holiday memorable, the hotel even boasts a reading room, fishing and a range of activities such as Eastern cookery and flower arranging.
Swimming pools
Restaurants
Bars
Cocktail lounge
Floodlit tennis courts
Squash courts
Table tennis
Windsurfing Jogging track
Fitness centre
Sauna
Disco
Nightclub
Shopping arcade
All rooms have air-conditioning, television, video, mini-bar, private bathroom and balcony.
No. of rooms: 550 
SOVEREIGN TWO-CENTRE BANGKOK/PHUKET
Combine the excitement of a week on Bangkok with a week on the unspoilt beaches of Phuket.
See pages 10–11 for descriptions of our Bangkok hotels.
Patong Beach
James Bond Island
THAVORN PALM BEACH Phuket
Situated on Karon Beach, one of the Phuket's finest beaches, the well-appointed rooms in the Thavorn Palm Beach have uninterrupted views out to sea.
Each of the rooms has been furnished in a manner which combines the elegant traditions of Thailand with the relaxed style of an international resort.
The range of facilities offered by this hotel are superb: magnificent freeform swimming pools surrounded by sun terraces, sporting opportunities ranging from tennis to deep sea fishing, and a choice of restaurants and bars cover the gamut of cuisine.
2 swimming pools
Seafood Restaurant
Grill room.
Coffee shop
Barbecue terrace
Lounges
Pool bars
2 floodlit tennis courts
Squash court
Windsurfing
Deep sea fishing
Jacuzzi
Gymnasium
Sauna
Shops
2 children's pools
Babysitting service
All rooms are air-conditioned with balcony, colour TV and video, telephone, radio and mini-bar.
No. of rooms: 210
DUSIT LAGUNA Phuket
This luxurious hotel of striking design is situated on its own beach and two inland lagoons just twenty minutes from Phuket Town.
Dining is terrific here, with fine cuisine in the sophisticated speciality restaurant, local cuisine in the new Thai restaurant and more informal dining in the Laguna Cafe.
As well as regular seafood barbecues, the hotel features dancing to live music in the evenings to get those toes tapping, and because of its own protected lagoons, this hotel can offer watersports all year round, even in the monsoon season!
Swimming pool
3 restaurants
Cafe
Private beach
Watersports
Entertainment
All rooms have private bath, shower, sea view and balcony, mini-bar and television
Gala dinner on New Year's Eve included in the price.
No. of rooms: 240
HOTEL KATA THANI Phuket
On a beautiful beach in a secluded bay, the Kata Thani is an informal hotel shielded by tropical forest in a delightfully serene area.
Recently, renovated and extended, and just 30 minutes from Phuket Town, this hotel offers the maximum of peach only a short distance away from the bright lights of the town, with plenty of water sporting and entertainment opportunities.
The rooms are comfortably furnished in Thai style, and the sea view rooms are well worth the extra.
2 swimming pools
2 restaurants
Open air restaurant
Coffee shop
Bars
Lounge
Entertainment
All rooms have air-conditioning, radio and telephone.
No. of rooms: 48
SOVEREIGN VALUE
HONEYMOONERS
Hotel: Kata Thani
Honeymooners receive  complimentary fruit and flowers.
Free Week: 2 for 1
Hotel: Kata Thani
Stay 1 week and have an extra week free on room only for arrivals between 1 May–31 October.
Breakfast is compulsory for second week.
SUNSET AT THE THAVORN PALM BEACH
THAVORN PALM BEACH
PATONG BEACH
DUSIT LAGUNA
KATA THANI
THAILAND TOURS
AROUND THAILAND TOUR
7 days/6 nights
This tour offers you a unique opportunity to gain an insight into the cultural and geographical aspects typical of Thailand: ruins of ancient towns and imposing temples that were once the glory of the country, exotic plants and wild jungle still unspoilt by the progress of time, rustic life with its simple and friendly people, rolling hills and roaring waterfalls, boat trips down the rapids and train rides, primitive hilltribes in their colourful costumes with a tradition and culture all their own.
Day 1
Bangkok–Pitsanuloke
Depart from Bangkok by air-conditioned bus to visit Ayudhya, the former capital of Thailand.
Continue via Saraburi to Phra Buddha Badh with its shrine of the holy footprint of Lord Buddha.
Lunch in Lopburi.
Visit the Prang Sam Yod (Sacred Three Spired Pagoda) and the ruins of the Wat Phra Sri Ratana Maha Dhat as well as the Monkey Temple.
Continue by train and bus to Pitsanuloke for dinner and overnight.
Day 2
Pitsanuloke–Lampang
After breakfast, visit the Wat Maha Dhat with its revered Buddha statue.
Continue to Sukhothai and visit the famous ruins of the first capital of Thailand (1257–1379).
After lunch, continue to Sri Satchanalai, the northern outpost town of the Kingdom of Sukhothai.
Proceed to Lampang for dinner and overnight.
Day 3
Lampang–Chiang Mai
Depart for Ko Kah to see Wat Phra Dhat Lampang Luang housing the only Emerald Buddha besides the one in Wat Phra Keo in Bangkok.
Continue to Lampoon to visit a White Karen Hilltribe village.
After lunch visit the famous Wat Haripoonchai in Lampoon.
Continue to Chiang Mai for dinner and overnight at the Rincome Hotel.
Optional evening visit to the city's night market.
Day 4
Chiang Mai
Morning tour of the Handicraft Villages.
After lunch, visit the most interesting temples in Chiang Mai such as Wat Phra Singh and Wat Doi Suthep.
In the evening there is a typical Thai dinner with local singing and dancing.
Day 5
Chiang Mai–Meo Hilltribe Village
Depart Chiang Mai for the Mae Saa Valley and visit an elephants' working camp.
Lunch at a local restaurant and then proceed to the Meo Hilltribe Village for accommodation at the Hmong Hilltribe Lodge.
The afternoon is at leisure.
In the evening there is a barbecue dinner around the camp fire, followed by a presentation of Meo dances.
Day 6
Chiang Mai–Chiang Rai
Travel North to Chiang Dao and Thatorn.
After lunch depart by boat for a five-hour journey down the Kok river, passing tiny hilltribe villages, bamboo huts and jungle.
Early evening arrival in Chiang Rai and transfer by rickshaw to the Wiang Inn Hotel for dinner and overnight.
Day 7
Chiang Rai–Bangkok
Morning visit to original hilltribes near Mae Chan.
Return by air via Chiang Mai to Bangkok.
Excursion no: EX3
Departures: Weekly on Mondays from Bangkok.
Prices are based on twin-bedded rooms with private bath or shower and full board.
Twin £299, Single £338.
An allowance will be made for accommodation not used in Bangkok.
Please ask Reservations for details.
THE ROAD TO MANDALAY
8 days/7 nights
This in-depth tour gives you the chance to visit Burma, one of the least known but most exciting destinations in Asia.
Day 1
Bangkok/Rangoon
Late morning departure for your flight to Rangoon.
In Rangoon contemporary and colonial Burma continue to co-exist decades after the British departure and it's here that you will spend your first two nights at either the Inya Lake or Strand Hotel.
Day 2
Rangoon
A city of 3.2 million people, Rangoon is surrounded on three sides by water and dominated by the glistening gold stupa of the Shwedagon.
Today's sightseeing will include the Shwedagon Pagoda, Bogyoke Market, the Sule Pagoda, and Kaba Aye Pagoda.
Day 3
Rangoon–Pagan
Fly to Pagan, one of the most remarkable religious cities of the world.
You will visit the most important sites, including the Shwezigon Pagoda and the Kupyaukyi and Thabyinnyu temples, the latter being the tallest building in Pagan.
Dinner and overnight at the Thiripyitsaya Hotel.
Day 4
Pagan–Mandalay
A morning flight takes you to Mandalay where scenic beauty and historical tragedy are inextricably meshed.
There is the indestructible Mandalay Hill with its kilometre-long covered stairways and remarkable pagodas, and below it the totally destroyed Royal Palace.
Your visit will include the Kuthodaw Pagoda, the Palace site, the Maha Muni Buddha image (the figure is 12′ 7″ high and coated with gold leaf ½ an inch thick), and the Zegyo market.
In the afternoon, visit Sagaing, considered by some to be the living centre of the Buddhist faith in Burma today.
Dinner and overnight at Mandalay Strand Hotel.
Day 5
Mandalay–Heho–Taunggyi
Fly to Heho and visit Inle Lake, whose shores are populated by the Inthas.
The homes of this minority tribe are built over the water on stilts, its vegetable fields float on the lake's surface and its fishermen propel their long narrow boats with a unique leg-rowing motion that has made them famous.
Overnight at the Taunggyi Strand Hotel.
Day 6
Taunggyi–Kalaw
Today you visit the Pindaya Caves, where thousands of carved Buddha images are stored.
Overnight at the Kalaw Hotel.
Day 7
Kalaw–Rangoon
Fly to Rangoon and transfer to the Inya Lake or Strand Hotel.
Rest of day at leisure.
Day 8
Rangoon–Bangkok
Morning at leisure, returning to Bangkok on the afternoon flight.
Excursion no: EX4
Departures: Weekly on Thursdays from Bangkok.
Prices are based on twin-bedded rooms with private bath or shower and full board.
Twin £803, Single £875 (from 1 April: Twin £953, Single £1049).
An allowance will be made for accommodation not used in Bangkok.
Ask Reservations for details.
Important Note: Every endeavour is made to operate the itineraries as stated or confirmed.
Due to limited facilities in Burma, irregularities might occur, however.
The actual operations in Burma are undertaken by the State-run ‘Tourist Burma’— over whom we have no control — and we therefore cannot be held liable or accept claims for damages resulting from changes, diversions, delays or cuts.
Hotel standards in Burma are generally below international levels, though the accommodation provided will be the best available.
FALLS NEAR CHIANG MAI
Malaysia
Contrasts form a large part of the innate charm of Malaysia, a country which has adapted and accepted change while still retaining its fabric of traditional values.
The peoples of many different countries have settled here and grafted their own cultures on Malaysia — observe the variety of influences on architecture and the cornucopia of festivals celebrated.
Spend some time in Kuala Lumpur, the hub of the country, and discover the opulence, the  squalor , the old and the new, all standing cheek by jowl and forming a massive, crazy, but undeniably fascinating, whole.
Discover the beauty of the Cameron Highlands near the capital, the ruins of a bygone age at Malacca, or the serene beauty of one of the many beaches on the popular island getaway of Penang.
With the neon lights of Georgetown at hand, Penang, the so-called ‘Pearl of the Orient,’ offers the perfect combination of relaxation in the sun and frenetic nightlife, with a few Chinese temples adding an irresistible garnish to this delightful island.
Not far away is the largest of the ninety-nine sparkling coral islands off Malaysia's western coast, the Island of Langkawi.
Rich in folklore and stunning scenery, the island is populated by scarcely 40,000 people, and retains a relaxed, friendly aura towards outsiders.
Quickly rising in popularity due to its magnificent white sand beach, Kuantan is one of the east coast's finest resorts.
Known for its high-spirited festivals and the local weaving trade, this lively resort has many restaurants and street stalls.
Both Langkawi and Kuantan are reached by short flights.
All of our holidays to Malaysia include a half-day sightseeing tour of the local area.
BATU FERRINGHI BEACH
PENANG TEMPLE
TEMPLE OF RECLINING BUDDHA
Visit Malaysia Year 1990 Calendar of Events
During Visit Malaysia Year there are countless festivals and celebrations, a selection of which are listed below.
27–28 Jan Chinese New Year (nationwide)
Houses are thrown open as Malaysians entertain their family and friends, firecrackers are let off everywhere and colourful lion dances make this one of the year's favourite events.
1–7 Feb Asian Folklore Festival (Kuala Lumpur, Penang, Malacca, Kuantan)
A festival of traditional dancing and street theatre, there will be twenty countries from all over the world putting on a memorable display.
10–16 Mar Langkawi Festival (Langkawi)
On the waters surrounding the 99 islands will be an impressive display of sailboats during the yearly races.
Waterskiing championships also make an exciting spectacle.
9 May Wesak Day (nationwide)
The celebration of Lord Buddha's enlightenment is the most important day in the Buddhist year.
Devotees offer alms to monks and release small birds from cages in adoration.
19–20 May Penang International Boat Festival (Penang)
From seventeen countries come competitors for this fast-paced event.
On-shore activities make for a lively and exhilarating festival.
6 Jun Birthday of H.M.
The Yang Dipertuan Agong (nationwide)
The King's birthday is celebrated in a blaze of colour, with banners and lights in the streets, cultural shows, traditional games and celebrations in the Lake Gardens and Merdeka Stadium in Kuala Lumpur.
16–17 July Penang Grand Prix(Penang)
One of the country's major sporting events features some of the world's finest racing drivers in a spectacle of great daring and skill.
31 Aug National Day (nationwide)
The country's independence is celebrated in an annual splash of colour.
The country is decked in lights and banners while parades, exhibitions and shows show the Malaysians pride in their country.
1 Oct Birthday of Prophet Muhammad (nationwide)
Lavish celebrations with chanting of holy verses and parades are held in each major town.
1–31 Dec Penang Festival (Penang)
Dragon boats with giant flags on 18 foot poles race off the shores and parades line the streets during this colourful month-long celebration.
For more information on Visit Malaysia Year 1990 and the above, please contact the Malaysian Tourist Office or our Reservations Dept.
HYATT KUANTAN Kuantan
This beautiful hotel is situated on an excellent sandy beach, just 3 miles from Kuantan.
It is surrounded by landscaped gardens and the lobby has views over the golden shore and waters of the South China Sea.
The low level hotel blends well into its tropical surroundings.
Swimming pool
Restaurants
Bars
3 tennis courts
2 squash courts
Games room
Watersports centre
Junior centre
9 hole golf course nearby
Disco
Evening entertainment
All rooms are air-conditioned with television, mini bar and private facilities.
No. of rooms: 185
CHERATING HOLIDAY VILLAS Kuantan
Ranged around three sides of a large swimming pool in gardens of palm trees and tropical plants, these villas are brightly designed to make the most of their magnificent surroundings.
On the beautiful 26 kilometres of Cherating Beach, the complex's huge picture windows, light colours and colourful furnishings complement the fine facilities offered.
There are further villas built in typical thatched native style amid the coconut palms of the gardens.
Swimming pool
Cocktail lounge
Tennis court
Squash court
Sauna
Gymnasium
Children's pool
Playground.
No. of rooms: 94
PELANGI BEACH RESORT Island of Langkawi
The latest addition to the Mandarin's luxury hotel chain is the Pelangi Beach Resort, a cluster of native-style bungalows on a white, sandy beach.
The Pelangi's Spice Market Restaurant serves good local and international cuisine, and there are many seafood restaurants in nearby Kuah.
This hotel is the perfect starting point to explore the island, with its beautiful scenery and excellent watersports.
Swimming pool with jacuzzi
Restaurant
Cocktail bar
Pool bar
Health club
3 tennis courts
2 squash courts
Catamaran sailing
Waterskiing
Scuba diving
Snorkelling
Windsurfing
Canoeing
Parasailing
Jungle trekking
Jogging track
Safari jeeps for hire
Bicycles.
No. of rooms: 300 
CHERATING HOLIDAY VILLAS
PELANGI BEACH RESORT
HOLIDAY INN Penang
The Holiday Inn is set right on the white sandy beach of Batu Ferringhi, about 20 minutes drive from Georgetown.
This is a well-equipped and comfortable hotel, offering good value for money.
Swimming pool
Sun terrace
Restaurants
2 bars
Tennis courts
Mini-gym
Waterskiing
Sailing
Shopping arcade
Unisex hairdressing and beauty salon
All rooms have air-conditioning, two double beds, colour television, in-house video, taped music, refrigerator, mini-bar and telephone.
No. of rooms: 151
PENANG MUTIARA BEACH RESORT Penang
A new hotel which opened last year, the Mutiara has lived up to expectations as the island's most luxurious hotel.
In 18 acres of tropical gardens on Teluk Bahang's beachfront, the rooms are designed to make the most of the magnificent views over the sea.
2 outdoor swimming pools
Restaurants
Fitness centre
Steam and sauna baths
Jacuzzi
Massage
4 tennis courts
4 squash courts
Roller skating rink
Volleyball
Badminton courts
Jogging track
Watersports
Shopping arcade
All rooms have air-conditioning, radio, colour television with in-house video, telephone, mini bar, hair dryer and balcony with sea view.
No. of rooms: 443
FLY-DRIVE IN MALAYSIA
The best way to get to know this beautiful country is by hiring a car.
Driving in Malaysia presents no problem as signs are in English and the roads are wide.
Take life at your own pace, stop when and where you want to, and discover as much of this strikingly beautiful country as you like.
Pick up your car in Kuala Lumpur, then take to the road, booking your hotel for the following night as you go.
The price of your fly-drive holiday includes both car hire and hotel accommodation vouchers.
First night's accommodation is prebooked for you and arrangements will be made for you to be met at the airport on arrival and transferred to your hotel.
You will be given all your documentation and vouchers on arrival and your car will be delivered to your hotel the following morning at 9am.
You can also prebook your last night's accommodation if you wish, but there will be a small administration fee.
The price includes:
Unlimited mileage
Insurance cover for bodily injury to third parties and property damage, loss by fire or theft and collision damage waiver.
Personal Accident Insurance can be provided at approx.
M$5.00 per person per day upon request, payable locally.
NB: There is an additional room charge for the Hyatt Kuantan between 1 February and 31 August of about M$25.00 per room per night, payable direct to the hotel.
Sovereign Multi-Centre
The Far East is an experience not to be missed.
Make your visit a chance to sample just a few of its many varied and exciting cultures by taking advantage of one our Far East multi centre holidays featured on pages 26 and 27.
PENANG MUTIARA
HONG KONG
Three thousand years of Chinese history and a hundred and fifty years of attachment to Britain has produced an electrifying, vividly coloured, if not at times garish, super-city of crowded streets, bustling eateries, high rise towers and myriadic shopping opportunities.
But, scratch below the surface of Hong Kong's burning neon signs in Chinese characters, and a world of sunsets, ancient monasteries and brightly painted junks can easily be uncovered.
From the crest of Victoria Peak, the whole sprawling metropolis of compact Hong Kong Island and many of its 236 islets and mainland territories can be surveyed.
Within the crowded streets and lively squares of the city lie a plethora of tiny open-air stalls selling everything from incense to caged pigeons, over six thousand restaurants serving the gamut of cuisine from Korean to French, and an array of gleaming hitech buildings housing progressive computer companies and financial whizzes.
Around seventy per cent of the Territories' land area is countryside; verdant hills, small villages, rice fields, beaches and country parks seem a million miles from the sampan-crowded harbour and Manhattan-style skyline of downtown Hong Kong.
The slow pace of life on Cheung Chau Island, Lantau or in the rural New Territories recalls scenes of rural China where time sails as leisurely as the tea-laden junks of yesteryear.
ON A SHOESTRING
New Harbour Hotel
Hong Kong Island
The New Harbour has an enviable position overlooking Hong Kong's magnificent harbour next to the Arts Centre.
This excellent location offers guests easy access to both shopping and sightseeing of Hong Kong Island and Kowloon, especially with the Peak Tram so close by.
Coffee shop
Restaurants
Bar
All rooms are fully air-conditioned with private facilities, colour television, radio, direct dial telephone and fridge.
No. of rooms: 173
IMPERIAL HOTEL Kowloon
Perfectly located on Nathan Road in Kowloon and within a short walking distance of the Star Ferry and Mass Transit Railway, the Imperial's rooms are simply furnished and rather small.
This is a good value hotel and a comfortable base for sightseeing and shopping in Hong Kong.
Gardena coffee shop/restaurant open from 06.30–24.00 hours 
All rooms are fully air-conditioned with colour television.
No. of rooms: 250 
SPECTACULAR HONG KONG
REPULSE BAY TEMPLE
DANCERS IN SUNG DYNASTY VILLAGE
THE OMNI HONG KONG HOTEL Kowloon
The Omni Hong Kong Hotel has one of the best locations in Hong Kong across the road from the Star Ferry in Kowloon, with many rooms having lovely views of the harbour.
It is also linked to the Ocean Shopping Centre, making easy access to some of the area's best shops.
Extremely comfortable rooms and excellent service complement the numerous restaurants serving continental and Chinese cuisine.
Several restaurants
Bars
Coffee shop
Swimming pool
Rooftop garden
Cinema
Beauty salon
All rooms are fully air-conditioned with colour TV, direct-dial telephone and minibar.
No. of rooms: 789
HOLIDAY INN GOLDEN MILE Kowloon
In the heart of the shopping district of Kowloon, this hotel is surrounded by duty-free shops, boutiques, restaurants and nightspots on Nathan Road's ‘Golden Mile’.
The hotel has recently been refurbished and upgraded.
Rooftop swimming pool
Health Club
Sauna
Several restaurants including the Baron's Table
Coffee shop
Delicatessen
All rooms are air-conditioned and have colour television and mini-bar.
No. of rooms: 600
THE MANDARIN ORIENTAL Hong Kong Island
One of the world's finest hotels, the Mandarin Oriental overlooks the harbour, a few minutes' walk from the famous Star Ferry.
It has a well-earned reputation for unrivalled luxury, superb cuisine and discreet service.
Rooms are beautifully furnished, and a stay at this hotel is nothing short of a memorable experience.
Clipper Lounge
2 Bars
Restaurant Pierrot
Man Wah Chinese Restaurant
Mandarin Grill
Coffee shop
Indoor swimming pool
Shops
Hairdressers
All rooms are fully air-conditioned with colour TV, in-house video, mini-bar and hairdryer.
No. of rooms: 544
SOVEREIGN MULTI-CENTRE
The Far East is an experience not to be missed.
Make your visit a chance to sample just a few of its many varied and exciting cultures by taking advantage of one of our Far East multi centre holidays featured on pages 26 and 27.
CHINESE NEW YEAR CELEBRATIONS
KOWLOON BY NIGHT
CAUSEWAY BAY, ABERDEEN
SINGAPORE
The world's busiest port and one of the globe's most important banking centres is also a place of immense beauty and fascinating contrasts.
Amid the sparkling high-rise towers and twinkling neon lights lies a core of colonial elegance and true Oriental style, vast, verdant parks and unexpected temples.
Named after the lion, Singapore was plucked from obscurity by the British, who were keen to develop the city-state as a trading port.
Junks laden with tea, wood and camphor soon transformed this sleepy backwater into the marketplace of South East Asia under the watchful eye of Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles; today Singapore is considered the place to purchase that Cartier wristwatch at a real snip.
Huge chrome and glass complexes open seven days a week sell goods from all over the globe, often cheaper than in their country of origin.
The Raffles Hotel embodies the days of the Raj, when it was a fashionable gathering place for princes, playwrights and film stars, but it is in the streets where the true cosmopolitan nature of Singapore is to be found — restaurants in Chinatown, Little India, Arab Street and Baghdad Street mirror the eclectic origins of the city.
MARINA MANDARIN Singapore
This deluxe hotel is situated in the exciting Marina Square complex, South East Asia's largest shopping mall.
Raffles Hotel and Chinatown are just five minutes away, and the Satay Club, an open air food centre, is nearby.
The beautifully furnished rooms have lovely views of the waterfront or city, and guests can relax by the pool with its impressive views out to sea.
Swimming pool
4 restaurants
Bars and lounges
Tennis and squash courts
Health club
Gymnasium
Jacuzzi
Sauna
Steam baths
Massage rooms
Nightclub
All rooms are air-conditioned and equipped with colour television, coffee and tea making facilities, mini-bar and radio.
No. of rooms: 640
ON A SHOESTRING
Miramar Singapore
Centrally located close to Chinatown and the business district with Orchard Road just a 5 minute drive away, this hotel offers excellent value for money with a choice of good restaurants.
2 outdoor swimming pools
Poolside cafe
3 restaurants
Bar
Health Centre
Gymnasium
Hydro pool
Steam bath
Sauna
Massage
All rooms are air-conditioned with colour television, refrigerator, telephone and radio.
No. of rooms: 346 
MARCO POLO Singapore
Always popular with British guests the Marco Polo has enhanced its appeal by a complete refurbishment, making it one of the most attractive hotels in Singapore.
It is set in lovely gardens, making the swimming pool a popular spot to relax once your shopping and sightseeing are complete.
Swimming pool
Restaurants
‘Parrots’ coffee shop
Brasserie
The Club
Health Club
All rooms are fully air-conditioned with private facilities.
No. of rooms: 603
SHANGRI-LA Singapore
On Orange Grove Road, just 5 minutes' walk from Singapore's main shopping and entertainment area along Orchard Road, this extremely luxurious hotel is set in beautiful gardens.
Well known for its excellent service and fine restaurants, there is a range of Chinese, continental and local dishes on the diverse menu.
Swimming pool
4 restaurants
Several bars
2 tennis and squash courts
Health Club
Shopping arcade
Xanadu discotheque
All rooms are fully air-conditioned with colour television and mini-bar.
No. of rooms: 750
TAI PAN RAMADA Singapore
Centrally located, this hotel is close to excellent shopping and interesting areas of Singapore, such as Chinatown, Arab Street and Little India, and is excellent value for money.
The Chinese restaurant serves Sichuan specialities and is one of the best in town.
Swimming pool with cafe
4 restaurants
Bar
Health and fitness centre
Complimentary shuttle service is operated to major shopping centres
All rooms are air-conditioned with coffee/tea making facilities, colour television and mini-bar.
No. of rooms: 500 
CHINESE OPERA, TIGER BALM GARDENS
MERLION STATUE
TURTLE TEMPLE, KUSU ISLAND
BALI AND LAMBOK
According to legend, the gods placed the great peak of Gunung Agung on Bali to stop this island paradise rocking — today the 10,400 sturdy feet of mountain rise high above the island and survey the scene of banyan trees, palm groves, bays of soft, pearl-white sand and terraced rice fields which lie at her feet.
Far from the slush of Hollywood's romantic fifties films set on Balinese shores, this tropical island has a magical culture and scenery which enchant all who visit.
Thousands of richly carved and gilded temples are strewn throughout its hills — the fabulous Holy Temple at Besakih, the Sea Temple at Tanah Lot or the highest in the island at Penuslisan.
Famed for its gentle, artistic people and elaborately performed ceremonies, the Island of the Gods, Lombok is a mere fifteen minute flight from Bali, but unlike her close sister, this island has been exposed to few tourists.
This idyllic setting is just the place to relax, swim or snorkel around the unspoilt coral reefs, and to explore the beautiful, unspoiled countryside surrounding the volcanic mountains.
From Mount Ampenan, and over the rocky coastline and long golden beaches is a sight to behold.
LOMBOK'S PONY CARTS
NUSA DUA BEACH HOTEL Bali
Located on Bali's southern peninsula, the Nusa Dua Beach Hotel is designed to reflect traditional Balinese architecture and is set in large, tropical gardens, leading to a superb white sandy beach.
The combination of elegant guest rooms, beautiful gardens with water cascades, streams, fountains and reflecting pools make the hotel a really delightful spot to spend either a relaxing or energetic holiday.
Large swimming pool
Pool bar
Several restaurants
Bars
Watersports available on the beach
2 tennis courts
2 squash courts
Regular evening entertainment
Discotheque
All rooms are fully air-conditioned with colour television and in-house movies, mini-bar and private balcony.
No. of rooms: 450
HOTEL BALI BEACH Bali
Set amidst acres of tropical landscaped gardens on Sanus Beach, the Bali Beach offers tremendous variety for the sports enthusiast.
It is an attractive hotel with good facilities for a beach holiday.
Swimming pool
4 restaurants and cafes
Skin diving
Waterskiing
Snorkelling
Sailing
Windsurfing
Tennis
Nine-hole golf course
10-pin bowling
Cabaret in the Bali Hai Supper Club
All rooms are fully air-conditioned with mini bar, TV with video films and balcony or patio.
No. of rooms: 650
SENGGIGI BEACH HOTEL Lombok
The Senggigi Beach Hotel stands on a small promontory with an exceptionally lovely beach.
Run by the same management as the Nusa Dua Beach Hotel in Bali, this hotel's accommodation comprises bungalows and cottages, all facing the crystal-clear sea.
This delightful hotel is ideal for a relaxing stay on a very special, unspoiled island.
Large swimming pool
Restaurant
Bar
Fully equipped diving school
Windsurfing
Snorkelling
Rod fishing
Tennis
Badminton
Basketball
Table tennis
Volleyball
All rooms are fully air-conditioned with private balcony.
No. of rooms: 52
SOVEREIGN VALUE
WATERSPORTS AND SPORTS
Hotel: Senggigi Beach
Free windsurfing, snorkelling, fishing rods.
Free tennis and table tennis.
Free badminton, basketball, volleyball and canoes.
KUTA BEACH
SENGGIGI BEACH HOTEL
FAR EAST MULTI CENTRES
A holiday to the Far East is a dream come true for most people.
Magical, mystical, fascinating and colourful, the culture and way of life in the Orient is so very different from our own that everyone should pay a visit at least once during their lifetime.
Experience the incredible excitement and amazing diversity of these Far east centres by opting for one of our multi centre holidays.
MALAYSIA
THAILAND
BANGKOK
HONG KONG
HONG KONG
The streets of this vibrant city teem with colour and excitement.
Street upon street of small Chinese shopfront, a Manhattan-like skyline and junks bobbing up and down on the busy harbour from indelible images of this British colony.
BALI
This tropical paradise is home to over a thousand temples, as well as shimmering lakes, pearl white beaches and majestic volcanoes.
Bali's people are noted for their grace and charm, their artistic dances and fabulous festivals.
SINGAPORE
Today this city-state is a pleasant mixture of Chinese, Malay and Indian cultures — temples and mosques fight for airspace with skyscrapers, and wide tree-lined avenues with gracious colonial buildings look out to the sparkling sea.
THAILAND
The newly-discovered destination of Thailand is stamped with its own distinct character: the charming mountain villages in the north differ widely from the popular beach resorts and idyllic islands in the south or the fascinating historic capital of Bangkok.
MALAYSIA
From the lush, sandy shores of the island of Penang to the great capital of Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia is a land of vast contrasts, Moorish cities, jungles, plantations and hill villages.
The choice is yours when you select a multi centre holiday — how long, where you want to spend your time and at which hotel.
We have put together a few of the most popular itineraries to help make your choice that little bit easier.
ORIENTAL DELIGHTS
Prices from (superior) £1592 (deluxe) £1667
EASTERN MAGIC
Prices from (standard) £1368 (superior) £1399 (deluxe) £1566
ORIENTAL ODYSSEY
Prices from (superior) £1725 (deluxe) £1816
EASTERN DISCOVERY
Prices from (standard) £1335 (superior) £1417 (deluxe) £1635
Please note: These holidays and any other multi centre combinations must be booked through our Reservations Department and are not available on Viewdata.
Prices for the above itineraries are based on charter flights from London to Bangkok.
Prices include all transfers, by air where applicable.
Scheduled flights are also available at a supplement.
Please call our Reservations Department for details.
HONG KONG
BALI
THE INDIAN CONTINENT
INDIA AND NEPAL
Over four thousand years of history have moulded the Indian peninsula into a tradition-laden, caste-conscious land of carved marble mosques, dramatic mountain scenery and spectacular coastline.
Reverence for the countryside and Buddha, dignity and pride run deep in this intensely respectful country.
The Ganges is hallowed as a sacred, cleansing river and the humble cow takes on new significance.
Holy shrines and elaborately carved Moghul palaces are spread thickly all over the land, from India's largest mosque, the Jama Masjid, in Delhi, to the splendour of the Palace of the Wind in Jaipur and the greatest, most massive mausoleum of all, the Taj Mahal near Agra.
All exalt immortality — of the body or the soul.
At the foot of the Himalayas lies Nepal, a sleepy, little-altered country guarding the huge bulk of terrain which yields the highest mountain in the world.
In magnificent mountain scenery, the country's capital of Kathmandu straddles a pinnacle in a tumble of ancient palaces and temples, encroached upon only by the trees and greenery which dot the scene.
Kashmir is an unknown land high in the mountains, a country of lakes and snow-covered peaks and a popular escape from the heat of the plains.
TAJ TRIANGLE
Day 1
London–Delhi
Depart London Heathrow by scheduled flight to Delhi.
Day 2
Delhi
On arrival in the early morning, transfer to Claridges Hotel.
Day at leisure to relax by the hotel swimming pool or explore Delhi on your own.
Day 3
Delhi
A full day's sightseeing has been arranged incorporating Old and New Delhi — Old Delhi with its impressive reminders of a colourful history in the Red Fort and the fascinating Chandni Chowk, a local bustling market and bazaar.
In complete contrast is New Delhi, the capital built by the British, with elegant wide avenues, impressive government buildings and India Gate.
Day 4
Delhi–Jaipur
Early morning departure for Jaipur, the ‘Pink City’.
En route visit the Amber Fort where elephants will take you to the hilltop to view the fort and the surrounding valley and lake.
Arrive at Clarks Amer Hotel and the rest of the day is at leisure.
Day 5
Jaipur
City tour of Jaipur, visiting the Maharajah's City Palace, now a museum, the beautiful Palace of Winds and the Ram Nivas Gardens.
Day 6
Jaipur–Agra
Early morning departure to Agra, visiting en route Fatehpur Sikri, built in 1569 by Emperor Akbar.
Continue to Agra where you will stay at Clarks Shiraz Hotel.
The rest of the day is at leisure.
Day 7
Agra
Today's tour will give you the opportunity to see the Taj Mahal, the tomb built as a testament to love by Shah Jahan for his wife Mumtaz.
You will also visit the massive fort and tomb of Itmad-Ud-Daula.
Afternoon at leisure.
Day 8
Agra–Delhi
Return to Delhi in the morning and transfer to the Claridges Hotel.
The rest of the day is at leisure.
Day 9
Delhi–London Passengers returning to London will transfer to the airport in the morning for a very early departure.
Departures on Fridays: 22 December, 2 and 23 February, 2 and 23 March, 13 April, 18 May, 22 June, 27 July, 17 August, 21 September, 19 October, 9 November.
KATHMANDU EXTENSION
Extend the Taj Triangle Tour by spending a few days in the fascinating city of Kathmandu.
Days 9–14
Kathmandu
Transfer to the airport for your flight from Delhi to mystical Kathmandu.
Your hotel, the Nirayani, is a good base from which to explore the surrounding area.
During your stay in Kathmandu you will be taken on three half-day excursions — Kathmandu city and Swayambhunath; Patan City with its beautiful carved wooden buildings and the Tibetan refugee handicraft centre; 9th century Bhadgaon, the Pashupatinath Temple and Boudhnath with its enormous stupa.
Day 14
Kathmandu–Delhi–London
Transfer to the airport for your flight to Delhi and your last night at Claridges Hotel.
In the very early hours of Saturday morning transfer back to the airport for your flight to London Heathrow.
LAKE PHEWA TAL, NEPAL
INDIA & NEPAL IN STYLE
A deluxe tour featuring some of the best hotels in India and Nepal.
Day 1
London–Delhi
Depart London Heathrow by British Airways scheduled flight to Delhi.
Day 2
Delhi
On arrival in the early morning, transfer to the Taj Palace Hotel.
Rest of the day at leisure.
Day 3
Delhi
Today's tour takes you to New and Old Delhi.
New Delhi was built by the British early this century and evokes memories of a different era with its wide avenues, beautiful gardens and imposing buildings.
Your visit to Old Delhi takes in the Jama Masjid mosque, the Red Fort, and the imposing stillness of Raj ghat where Gandhi's funeral rites were performed.
Day 4
Delhi–Jaipur
Today's journey takes you to Jaipur, visiting en route the gleaming Amber Fort, where the traditional mode of ascent is on the back of an elephant.
The architectural details are lavish and ornate, with many clever innovations.
The afternoon is free to enjoy the city.
Two nights will be spent in a lovely Rajasthan Palace — now the Jai Mahal Hotel.
Day 5
Jaipur
This morning a tour of the city has been arranged which includes the Maharajah's City Palace and the Palace of Winds.
Afternoon at leisure.
Day 6
Jaipur–Agra
Depart to Agra visiting en route the deserted city of Fatehpur Sikri built by Emperor Akbar in 1569.
Continue to Agra where two nights will be spent at the Taj View Hotel.
The rest of the day is at leisure.
Day 7
Agra
Today you will see the world-famous Taj Mahal built by Shah Jahan as a tomb for his wife Mumtaz, and Akbar's Tomb at Sikandra.
The rest of the day is at leisure.
Day 8
Agra–Khajuraho
A morning flight will take you to Khajuraho with overnight accommodation at the Taj.
In the afternoon, visit the famous temples with their beautiful carvings of erotic Hindu art.
Day 9
Khajuraho–Veranasi
A morning flight takes you to Varanasi where you will stay at the Taj Ganges Hotel.
There is an afternoon visit to the temples and a drive to the buried Buddhist city of Sarnath where Buddha gave his first sermon.
Day 10
Varanasi–Kathmandu
Today we have arranged an early morning boat excursion on the holy river Ganges to seen the Bathing Ghats and the cremation sites.
A late morning direct flight takes you to Kathmandu where you will stay at the Oberoi Soaltee Hotel for 2 nights.
The afternoon sightseeing tour of the city will include Hanuman Dhoka Palace and a stroll around the Singha Durbar and local bazaars.
Later, drive to the Buddhist Swayambhunath Stupa, said to be 2,000 years old.
From here, you will have an excellent view of the city of Kathmandu.
Day 11
Kathmandu
Today's tour will take you to Patan, the city of fine arts.
You will see the Krishna, Hiranya Varna Mahavihar and Mahabouddha Temple.
In the afternoon you will drive to Bhadgaon, 4,600 feet above sea level and founded in the 9th century.
Visit the Durbar Square with its temples overlooked by the Palace of 55 Windows.
The tour continues to Pashupatinath Temple, built on the banks of the Bagmati River.
From here you will drive to see the Boudhnath stupa, one of the largest in the world.
Day 12
Kathmandu–Pokhara
After breakfast you will take a flight to Pokhara and the Fishtail Lodge, where you will stay for 2 nights.
The Lodge is built close to the Phewa Lake.
The town of Pokhara has colourful bazaars brimming with interesting wares, transported on mules.
Day 13
Pokhara
A half-day tour of the Pokhara Valley has been arranged, leaving the rest of the day at leisure.
Day 14
Pokhara–Royal Chitwan National Park
Today's journey will take you to the Royal Chitwan National Park for two nights at the Gaida Lodge.
The park is teeming with big game and you may be lucky enough to see the Royal Bengal Tiger.
Day 15
Chitwan
A day to participate in the various game viewing activities.
Day 16
Chitwan–Kathmandu
Drive to Kathmandu where you will have the rest of the day for shopping and sightseeing.
Overnight at the Oberoi Soaltee Hotel.
Day 17
Kathmandu–Delhi
Afternoon flight from Kathmandu to Delhi and the Taj Palace Hotel.
Day 18
Delhi–London
Transfer to the airport for your early morning departure to London Heathrow.
Departures on Fridays: 22 December, 26 January, 16 February, 16 March, 13 April, 20 July*, 17 August*, 14 September*, 5 and 26 October, 9 November.
•India and Kashmir in Style
For departures 20 July, 17 August and 14 September, the tour detailed above incorporates a stay in Kashmir instead of Nepal.
Itinerary from Day 10 is as follows: 1 night Delhi, 5 nights Srinagar, 1 night Delhi.
DISCOVER KASHMIR
This tour focuses on the blissful lake setting of  Srinagar where accommodation is in traditional houseboats, luxurious floating palaces complete with verandas and houseboys.
Day 1
London–Delhi
Depart London by scheduled flight for Delhi.
Days 2–4
Delhi
At leisure in Delhi with optional tours available to discover Old and New Delhi or the elaborate Taj Mahal at Agra.
Accommodation is at the Hotel Siddarth, Delhi.
Day 5
Delhi–Srinagar
Fly to Srinagar, where you will be met and transferred to houseboat accommodation.
Days 6–10
Srinagar
Sightseeing in Kashmir includes the formal Moghul Gardens, a Kashmir carpet factory and bazaar.
There is a full day excursion to Gulmarg, the Meadow of Flowers, as well as the chance to explore Lake Dal aboard a shikara.
Day 11
Srinagar–Delhi
Fly to Delhi for your last night before returning to London.
Departures on Wednesdays: 9 & 23 May, 13 & 27 June, 11 July, 1 & 29 August, 12 & 26 September, 10 & 24 October and 14 November.
LOCAL TRANSPORT
DELHI, LAXMI NARAYAL TEMPLE
THE INDIAN OCEAN
SRI LANKA
A tiny teardrop in a shimmering sea at the foot of the Indian peninsula, Sri Lanka is an untamed isle which has been coveted by Westerners for many centuries.
Tea and spices have played their part in making this unforgotten paradise a priceless jewel which has been snatched by the Portuguese, Dutch, and finally the British.
But today, the one-time colonial port of Ceylon relies chiefly on agriculture as its economic mainstay; political upheavals have reduced its tourism industry to almost nothing, and the island remains an undiscovered, little-frequented tribute to the hand of Dame Nature.
Small wonder that flocks of European and Scandinavian birds choose it as their resting point when migrating to more congenial climes each winter.
Amid the dry mountain landscapes of the lush hinterland lie ruins of ornate Buddhist temples, ancient cities which flourished centuries ago before being deserted, and miles of characteristic tea plantations, providing the country with one of its staple industries.
Waterfalls and lakes, villages and temples, sapphire mines and hazardous mountain passes proliferate in this country of raw, unspoilt elements and strikingly-coloured flora.
The glory of the island must be one of the thousand miles of sandy shoreline which rings the island, acknowledged as some of the finest beachland in Asia.
Palm trees line the edge of the wide, open stretches of white sand, with the calm, temperate waters of the Indian Ocean lapping sleepily all the while.
In anyone's terms, Sri Lanka must certainly be everyone's cup of tea.
DISCOVERY TOUR OF SRI LANKA
To tour Sri Lanka is to take a voyage of discovery through a land of endless variety.
This 8 day tour takes you to many of the island's most interesting spots, from the fascinating town of Colombo, with its ancient fort and temples to a thrilling safari by jeep of the Bundala National Park, teeming with birds and wildlife.
Sri Lanka's original capital, Anuradhapura, is a city of many ruinous stately buildings and ancient remains; the 2500 year old Bo tree, Royal Pleasure Gardens and the Samadhi Buddha show the former grandeur of this city.
Polonnaruwa's elaborate rock carvings of Buddha, the Royal Palace ruins and the Lotus Bath are relics worthy of the country's second capital.
Nearby Sigiriya's palace and rock fortress give good views over the town, although it is the famed frescoes painted with earth pigment which attract most people.
The lovely town of Kandy is noted for the exquisite murals in the Dambulla rock temple, and the craft markets which stamp this town with a lively atmosphere.
Nuwara Eliya is Sri Lanka's premier hill resort, with a lovely mountain climate in the heart of tea growing country.
Our Discovery Tour of Sri Lanka will introduce you to the many wonders of this harmonious land.
SOVEREIGN TWO-CENTRE
SRI LANKA/MALDIVES
Have the best of both worlds by spending time discovering the fabulous sights of Sri Lanka followed by a stay on the superb white sand beaches of the Maldives 
ROWANELLA FALLS
NEPTUNE Beruwela Beach
Situated on Beruwela Beach, the Neptune is a comfortable hotel set in a palm grove with lawns leading down to the sea.
The terrace of the dining room leads out to the freshwater swimming pool and there is a pizzeria and bar on the beach.
Swimming pool
Restaurants
Bar
Windsurfing
Waterskiing
Tennis
Table tennis
Badminton
Volley ball
Health club
Sauna
Beauty salon
Shopping arcade
Disco
Evening entertainment
All rooms are air-conditioned and have private facilities.
No. of rooms: 104
Transfer time: Approx. 2¼ hours
TRITON Ahungalla
Situated in the village of Ahungalla 50 miles south of Colombo, the Triton is recognised as Sri Lanka's best beach hotel.
Surrounded by coconut groves, it looks out over a large, open-air swimming pool onto an excellent sandy beach and the sea beyond.
Swimming pool
3 restaurants
2 bars
Tennis courts
Billiards room
Table tennis
Health club
Sauna
Hairdresser
2 shops
Evening entertainment
All rooms are air-conditioned with private facilities and sea view or partial sea view.
No. of rooms: 125
Transfer time: Approx. 2½ hours
BROWNS BEACH Negambo
Set on the beautiful sandy beach at Negambo, the modern Browns Beach Hotel is notable for its cuisine and entertainment.
The Beachcomber Restaurant specialises in both Eastern and Western dishes, making this restaurant the best on the coast, the Sunday buffet spread having more than forty dishes.
Entertainment at the hotel is lively, with a Fire Limbo act heating up the Barbecue Night, the live bands of the Sunset Nightclub and the sociable Pool Terrace Bar.
Swimming pool
Restaurants
Bar
Private beach
Tennis court
Indoor games
Mini zoo
Barbecue night
Nightclub.
Transfer time: Approx. ½ hour.
ON A SHOESTRING
HIBISCUS
Kalutara Beach
This unpretentious hotel is one of the newest in Sri Lanka, and is situated on Kalutara beach some 30 miles south of Columbo.
The hotel is simple and informal, but attractively furnished and fulled with plants and offers excellent value for money.
Swimming pool
Bar
Lounge
Restaurant
All rooms have balcony, ceiling fan and private facilities.
No. of rooms: 50
Transfer time: Approx. 2¼ hours.
SOVEREIGN VALUE
HONEYMOONERS
Hotels: Browns Beach, Hibiscus, Triton, Neptune
Honeymooners receive complementary fruit and flowers (except arrivals between 15 Dec–5 Jan).
FREE WEEK: 3 FOR 2/2 FOR 1
Hotels: Browns Beach, Hibiscus, Triton, Neptune
Stay for 1 or 2 weeks and have an extra week free on room only for arrivals between 1 May–31 Oct.
Breakfast is compulsory during extra week.
EXTRA VALUE
Hotel: Triton
Free excursion and champagne brunch at 100 Islands for guests staying a minimum of 14 nights on arrivals between 16 Dec–30 Apr.
NEPTUNE
TRITON
TEA PICKING IN THE HILLS
HIBISCUS
MALDIVES
Stretching across the Indian Ocean from the south of India to the equator are the 1,200 tiny coral islands in a patch of deep blue forming the Maldives.
In this relaxed, sun-dappled atmosphere of banyan trees, velvet sand and wide horizons, the Maldives seem like a lost corner of the globe, waiting to be stumbled across by some shipwrecked mariner.
Life on the islands is relaxed and simple.
Basic and unsophisticated, the resorts are clearly designed to blend with the natural surroundings and feature little in the way of nightly entertainment; watching the evocative sunsets or taking romantic walks along the beach at twilight are more in keeping with this slice of unadulterated paradise.
Island-hopping by coconut timber dhotis is the way the natives travel; for guests to the Maldives this opens up a world of coves gently lapped by crystal-clear waters, underwater coral mazes and watersporting opportunities — alternatives to basking on the shores of an isolated stretch of sand.
BI YA DOO AND VILLI VARU ISLAND RESORTS Maldives
Bi Ya Doo and Villi Varu, operated by Taj Hotels, are two of the best island resorts in the Maldives, offering good accommodation, excellent service and a variety of good food.
Here you can swim, fish, sunbathe or simply do nothing.
Both hotels offer naturally ventilated rooms with ceiling fans, and some air-conditioned rooms; each room has a mini-fridge.
Both resorts have an air-conditioned restaurant and bar, a clubhouse with bar facilities and an open grill to cook their own freshly caught fish.
Menus offer a good variety, and regular barbecues are held.
There is a video for guests and disco music for dancing.
Each resort has laundry facilities and a shop.
There is a fully-equipped diving base which conducts courses for both beginners and the advanced, with instructors who are qualified to certify on completion of the course.
Guests can also enjoy windsurfing, water-skiing and snorkelling.
SOVEREIGN TWO-CENTRE
MALDIVES/SRI LANKA
After a week on the superb white sand beaches of the Maldives, why not spend a second week discovering the beauty of Sri Lanka?
SEYCHELLES
Lying in the Indian Ocean thousands of miles from anywhere, over one hundred minute coral and granite islands form the cluster known as the Seychelles — islands with enchanting names like Mahe, Praslin, La Digue, Fregate…the Seychelles come very close to most people's idea of deserted island paradise.
Indeed, the prehistoric forest of the Vallee de Marai on Praslin has long been suspected as being the original Garden of Eden, and the granite substance of the isles proves that India was once attached to the African mainland.
Only inhabited for the past two hundred years, the unique flora and fauna of these delightfully unsophisticated island have been allowed to evolve undisturbed over the past 600 million years, yielding a unique heritage of birds and blooms encompassing the spectrum's every colour.
A hundred types of coral and nine hundred different species of fish delight divers and swimmers alike.
Between the lush coconut groves and cinnamon plantations, these spice-ridden islands' soft, silvery beaches are the best the world can offer — beautiful Beau Vallon on Mahe must rate as the Seychelles' very special favourite.
LA RESERVE Praslin Island
A delightful, small hotel at Anse Petit Cour in the north of the island, La Reserve stands in its own cove on a beautiful sandy beach.
All rooms in the hotel have splendid views out to sea and are well furnished in traditional island style with louvre windows, stained wood floors and stone features.
The thatched restaurant offers a splendid selection of international and local creole dishes.
Swimming pool
Tennis courts
Private beach
All rooms have bath, shower, fan, minibar, fridge and patio.
No. of rooms: 15 
FREGATE ISLAND
PRASLIN
LA DIGUE
VISTA BAY CLUB Mahe Island
Located in a quiet, picturesque setting at Glacis on the west coast.
Its unusually spacious guest rooms are in a two storey block built terrace fashion down the hillside, each room overlooking the gardens or swimming pool and beyond to the ocean.
By the pool and adjacent to the sundeck are small bars for drinks.
Steep paths lead down through the landscaped gardens and over a foot-bridge to the main building directly across the road.
Here, at the water's edge, you have a small beach and sundeck with a bar/snack bar for lunches and a restaurant where international and Creole cuisine is served.
Swimming pool
Poolside terrace
Bar
2 restaurants
Snorkelling
Deep sea fishing and other water sports can be arranged
Private beach nearby
Informal entertainment
All rooms are air-conditioned with private bathrooms, telephone, colour television with in-house movies, mini-fridge and hairdryer.
No. of rooms: 41
Transfer time: Approx. 45 minutes
CORAL STRAND Beau Vallon
On the three kilometres of pristine white beach at Beau Vallon is the Coral Strand, not only a comfortable and prestigious hotel, but also a popular meeting place — the Lalanier Beach Bar and Garden of Eden are both well-known beachside venues.
Most of the hotel's rooms have views over the sea, if not over the swimming pool, and the scuba diving school gives novices the opportunity to discover the delights of the Seychellois underworld.
Swimming pool
Sun terraces
Restaurant
Coffee shop
Beach bar
Sea-diving school
Barbecues
Folklore shows
Live music for dancing
All bedrooms are air-conditioned with telephone, radio and balcony.
No. of rooms: 103
Transfer time: Approx. 30 minutes.
BEAU VALLON BAY Mahe Island
This well known resort hotel is located directly on the superb Beau Vallon Bay, a long stretch of fine, white sandy beach.
It is set in spacious tropical gardens and offers a good choice of facilities.
Restaurant serving both international and Creole cuisine
Coffee shop
Outdoor barbecues
Air-conditioned residents lounge
Cocktail bar
Al fresco patio bar
Freshwater swimming pool
Dancing
Fashion shows
Local sega music and dance
Complimentary wind-surfing, tennis, hobie cats, sailboats, rowing boats, canoes and snorkelling
water-skiing and paragliding
Hairdressing salon
Shops
Children's facilities including playground, paddling pool and special menus and babysitting on request
All rooms are air-conditioned with private facilities.
No. of rooms: 184
Transfer time: Approx. 30 minutes 
TAKAMAKA BEACH, MAHE
CORAL STRAND
PLANTATION CLUB Mahe Island
Set in 180 acres of tropical gardens on a magnificent beach at Baie Lazare on the southern coast of Mahe, the Plantation Club is the Seychelles' newest deluxe hotel.
The beach is protected by a reef, and accommodation is in junior suites, each with a split-level bedroom, living room, bathroom with dressing area and balcony, the majority of rooms facing the sea.
Please note that watersports are subject to tide patterns.
Swimming pool
Sun terraces
Restaurants, Open air coffee shop
Snack bar
4 bars
2 floodlit tennis courts
Games room
Mini golf
Table tennis
Darts
Shuffle board
Paddle tennis
Sailing
Deep sea and freshwater fishing
Waterskiing
Snorkelling
Diving
Nature trail
Golf course nearby
Children's playground
Shops
Hairdresser
Beauty salon
Health club
Weight training room
Jacuzzi
Sauna
Air-conditioned casino
Indoor and outdoor dance floors
24 hour room service
All rooms are air-conditioned with colour television and in-house videos.
No. of rooms: 206
Transfer time: approx. 30 minutes
SEYCHELLES SHERATON Mahe Island
Set in 20 acres of beautiful tropical gardens on the west coast of Mahe at Pont Glaud the Seychelles Sheraton offers a combination of deluxe facilities with a relaxed atmosphere.
There is a small beach in front of the hotel and guests will enjoy the unique feature of crossing to Ile Therese (the Sheraton Island) by a regular shuttle boat where there is a magnificent beach where watersports are available.
All non-motorised water sports are free of charge.
Swimming pool
Tennis
Air-conditioned squash court
Windsurfing
Paragliding
Sailing
Waterskiing
Snorkelling
Scuba diving
Deep sea fishing
Pedaloes
Glass bottom boat trips
Several bars
2 restaurants (one fully air-conditioned)
Nightclub
Hairdressing salon
Several boutiques
Baby-sitting service
All rooms are fully air-conditioned with sea view, bathroom, balcony, telephone, in-house radio, colour television with in-house movies
24 hour room service.
No. of rooms: 177
Transfer time: approx. 60 minutes
SOVEREIGN TROPICAL ISLAND WEDDINGS
What could possibly be more romantic than a wedding on a tropical island?
Sovereign Worldwide would be delighted to arrange your ‘Wedding Package’, taking care of everything from the registrar to your flowers.
For further information, please contact our Reservations Department at least eight weeks prior to your departure.
SOVEREIGN VALUE
HONEYMOONERS
Hotel: Vista Bay Club
Honeymooners receive  complimentary bottle of wine, fruit and flowers.
Hotel: Seychelles Sheraton
Honeymooners receive  complimentary fruit, flowers and a bottle of sparkling wine.
Special Wedding Package
Hotel: Vista Bay Club
Includes free wedding cake, free flowers for reception, free champagne for up to 20 guests, free bouquet and hairpiece for the bride and button hole for the groom.
Please call our Reservations Department for further information.
Watersports
Hotel: Des Roches
Free windsurfing, canoeing, snorkelling and mini sailing.
Extra value
Hotel: Denis Island
Guests receive Rps 300 bar credit per person per week for arrivals between 1–16 Dec, 1 May–7 July and 6 Sept–4 Oct.
SEYCHELLES SHERATON
AUBERGES DES ISLES
One of the delights of the Seychelles is the number of small hotels with only about ten rooms, where you can enjoy personal and friendly service and the careful attention of the owners.
The blissfully peaceful hotels we have selected are all on Mahe Island and well situated for the beautiful beaches.
COCO D'OR Beau Vallon
The Coco D'Or is in an excellent position at Beau Vallon, only 3 minutes' walk from the famous Beau Vallon Beach.
The hotel has only 8 rooms, all fully air-conditioned with private bathrooms, telephone and mini-fridge.
There is a bar and restaurant where both international and Creole specialities are served — the number of outside guests visiting the restaurant is proof of the quality of cuisine!
No. of rooms: 8
PANORAMA Beau Vallon
An informal small hotel excellently run by Sheila Smith and superbly situated just across the road from Beau Vallon Beach and 4 miles from Victoria.
The rooms form an L-shape around a pleasant lawn and the main house contains the bar, small lounge and restaurant where excellent Creole and Continental cuisine is served.
The accommodation is simple but adequate and Sovereign clients are assured of a warm welcome.
For evening entertainment there are a number of hotels, bars and restaurants within walking distance.
Guests wishing to stay on Praslin can make arrangements locally to spend 2 nights at the Indian Ocean Fishing Club for a nominal charge plus the air or boat ticket.
No. of rooms: 8
CASUARINA BEACH Anse aux Pins
This delightful hotel is situated in a tropical garden on the beach of Anse aux Pins.
It has 16 air-conditioned rooms with private bathrooms and terraces.
The restaurant and lounge/bar overlook the sea and are tastefully furnished.
The food is excellent, with international cuisine as well as Creole, for which the hotel is well known.
No. of rooms: 16 
Fregate Island
Baje Lazare Mahe
Coco D'Or
Praslin
View towards Mahe
ISLAND HOPPING
A good way to get the very best out of your stay in the Seychelles and appreciate the wide variety of wildlife and rate species of birds in particular is to take an island-hopping holiday.
Spend a week on Mahe to relax and unwind, then board your Twin Otter or Trislander flight bound for one of the smaller islands…
Praslin, home of the rare Black Parrot and the Vallee de Mai where the mysterious Coco-de-Mer palms grow…
Bird Island with its population of one million Sooty Terns and Esmeralda, the 150 year old (male!)
Giant Tortoise…a visit to the beautiful island of La Digue can be booked locally as a day excursion by ferry from Praslin…
Travel between Praslin and the other islands is by Air Seychelles; the baggage allowance on these flights is only 5kg, so remember to take a small bag for use when island hopping.
Suggested Combinations:
DENIS ISLAND LODGE Denis Island
The 350 acres of this coral island are thick with coconut palms, beaches of the softest sand and lapped by the clearest waters imaginable.
Deep sea fishing off the island's coast is as popular as it is a challenge, with plenty of record-breaking specimens of sailfish, marlin or tuna to be hooked.
The island has 24 roomy bungalows scattered about the beachfront, each with a wide verandah and excellent facilities.
No. of rooms: 25
BIRD ISLAND LODGE Bird Island
When your light aircraft taxies to a standstill, the reception of the the island's only hotel, the Bird Island Lodge, is only a few steps away.
Set amongst towering palms, this is a delightful complex of 25 thatched bungalows, simply furnished, but clean and spacious, and just a few steps from the beach.
With its friendly staff and idyllic atmosphere you will soon relax — on the beach, at the bar or enjoying the fine Creole food in the attractive restaurant.
For the energetic there is snorkelling and fishing, tennis, table tennis and a pool table.
Glass-bottom boat trips are also available.
This a lovely place to get away from the pressures of everyday life under the care of the owner and his friendly staff.
No. of rooms: 25
PRASLIN BEACH HOTEL Praslin
Situated on the romantic island of Praslin, the Praslin Beach Hotel has a unique design which contributes to the special feel of a tropical holiday.
It has 94 rooms and self-catering apartments set around a central pool and bar, around which much of the hotel life revolves.
The rooms are on two levels each with its own verandah or balcony overlooking the gardens and pool.
There is a small cosy bar with open-air tables.
In the spacious restaurant the local chefs delight in colourful displays of hot and cold buffets, made up of the island's abundant supply of fish and home grown fruits and vegetables.
If you wish, an optional day-trip to the island of La Digue can be taken.
Its mysterious charm and air of utter tranquillity combined with deserted, sandy beaches is well worth visiting.
No. of rooms: 94
DES ROCHES Amirantes
Des Roches is the Seychelles newest island resort.
The largest of the Amirantes group of islands, Des Roches is situated 120 miles southwest of Mahe and just under an hour by plane.
Accommodation is in comfortably furnished thatched chalets, all facing the sea and beach, and are joined to the central restaurant and bar by a covered walkway.
The island itself is ideal for watersports and there is a fully equipped watersports centre.
Restaurant
Scuba diving
Snorkelling
Fishing
Hobie cat
Mini sailing
Canoeing
Windsurfing
Waterskiing
Jet skiing
All rooms have private facilities.
No. of rooms: 20
SOVEREIGN TWO-CENTRE
Seychelles/Mauritius
The combination of these two exotic islands set in the Indian Ocean will fulfil all your expectations of a paradise on earth.
Kenya/Seychelles
What a combination, a spectacular safari in Kenya followed by the beautiful secluded beaches of the Seychelles.
Bird Island
La Digue
MAURITIUS
Mark Twain fancifully observed that God had modelled heaven on Mauritius, a thought which has been echoed by thousands of travellers who have since discovered the untapped beauty and raw charm of this lovely isle.
Some seven hundred miles east of Madagascar, Mauritius lay on the direct sea route to the Spice Islands, and was first settled by the Dutch until the French moved in during 1715, leaving indelible traces in the form of place names, cuisine, architecture and language.
Though French speaking, the population is a melange of different cultures, and is predominantly of Indian origin — delicious, spicy curries are high on the menu with good restaurants offering authentic French and Chinese dishes.
From its coastline of powdery soft, sandy beaches — Flic-en-Flac and Belle Mare are amongst the most beautiful — lagoons and inlets, bamboo and banana forests, the land rises to form a broad plateau with row upon row of flourishing sugar cane and volcanic peaks which tower above deep craters.
However, the hidden beauty of Mauritius lies beneath the water's surface, concealing a world of vivid colour — coral gardens with exotic marine life and over fifty submerged shipwrecks beckon scuba diving enthusiasts, and deep sea fishing is among the best in the world.
SAINT GERAN Belle Mare
Standing on a small peninsula surrounded by the beautiful Belle Mare beach, the buildings of the luxurious Saint Geran are grouped around a lagoon.
This is reputed to be one of the five most beautiful hotels in the world, and is certainly the most prestigious hotel in Mauritius, with service, food and style to match.
All watersports except scuba diving (extra charge payable locally) are free to hotel guests.
Swimming pool
Bars
Restaurant
Sauna
Waterskiing
Scuba diving (extra charge payable locally)
Windsurfing
Sailing
Glass bottomed boat tours
Canoes
Pedaloes
Floodlit tennis courts with professional coaching
Nine-hole golf course
Hairdressing salon
Shop
Young Pirates Club
Full-time children's hostess
Dancing
Resident band
Occasional cabaret shows
Casino
Disco
All rooms are fully air-conditioned with mini bars.
No. of rooms: 177
Transfer time: approx. 60 minutes
LE TOUESSROK Trou d'Eau Douce
Picturesque, tranquil, secluded, romantic, Le Touessrok is a hide-away on its own small island.
There are two small beaches and a short boat trip away, the beautiful Ile Aux Cerfs offers deserted coves, restaurants and beach bars, and a wide range of watersports (which with the exception of scuba diving, are free to guests of the hotel).
Diving trips can also be arranged.
Swimming pool
Restaurants
Bar
Sauna
3 floodlit tennis courts
Evening cabaret shows
Dancing
Discotheque
Children's facilities
Full-time children's hostess
All rooms face the lagoon, are air-conditioned and equipped with telephone, mini bar and balcony.
No. of rooms: 100
Transfer time: approx. 60 minutes
SOVEREIGN TWO-CENTRE MAURITIUS/SEYCHELLES
The combination of these two exotic islands set in the Indian Ocean will  fulfil all your expectations of a paradise on earth.
Grand Baie
Saint Geran
Le  Touessrok 
LE FLAMBOYANT Belle Mare Beach
In beautiful native gardens looking out over the magnificent Belle Mare Beach, this new hotel's rooms all overlook the sea.
Catering for the visitor's every whim, Le Flamboyant has a marvellous range of watersports, entertainment during the evening and big game fishing for those with an adventurous streak.
Freshwater swimming pool
Restaurant
Bar
Evening entertainment
Casino 1 mile away
Floodlit tennis court
Mini club
Free sports
Scuba diving, big game fishing and glass bottom boat (supplement payable)
All rooms are sea facing and have bathroom, balcony and radio.
No. of rooms: 90
Transfer time: approx. 60 minutes
BLUE LAGOON Blue Bay
Right on the beachfront at gorgeous Blue Bay, the Blue Lagoon is a converted plantation house which retains its yesteryear elegance.
Each room in the hotel is different, furnished and decorated with style and attention to detail.
Service at this small hotel is friendly and attentive, and the restaurant serves both international and local Mauritian cuisine.
Swimming pool
Restaurant
Bar
Free watersports
Regular evening entertainment
All rooms have bathroom and shower.
No. of rooms: 40
Transfer time: approx. 30 minutes
MERVILLE BEACH Grand Baie
Located in a magnificent setting on a fine white sandy beach in Grand Baie, the Merville which has recently undergone extensive remodelling, is a first class hotel with many exotic amenities.
Its relaxed atmosphere, proximity to shops and restaurants and excellent children's facilities combine to make this a delightful holiday destination.
All watersports, with the exception of scuba diving and deep sea fishing are complimentary to guests of the hotel.
Accommodation is either in the main building or in superior rooms in cottages, which lie in the grounds.
Swimming pool
3 bars
2 restaurants
Health club with sauna
Sailing
Waterskiing
Scuba diving
Windsurfing
Deep sea fishing boat for hire
Glass bottomed boats
Pedaloes
Tennis
Petanque
Golf course nearby
Children's pool
‘Mickey Mouse’ club
Babysitting
Boutique
Games room
Band
Casino nearby
Dancing
All rooms are air-conditioned and have radio and telephone.
No. of rooms: 120
Transfer time: approx. 90 minutes
SOVEREIGN VALUE
HONEYMOONERS
Hotel: Le Touessrok
Honeymooners receive complimentary fruit, local champagne and gifts.
Hotel: St. Geran Honeymooners receive complementary fruit, local champagne and flowers.
FREE WEEK: 3 FOR 2
Hotels: Le Touessrok & St. Geran
Stay 2 weeks and have an extra week free on room only for arrivals between 23 Apr–31 Jul and 1–30 Sep.
Half board is compulsory for extra week.
Blue Lagoon
Le Flamboyant
Merville Beach
EAST AFRICA
KENYA
Bisected by the equator, Kenya basks in the intense sunlight which renders this country one of the most dramatically moulded outdoor showpieces to which the world lays claim.
Arid deserts, vast savannah lands, huge lakes and 480 kilometres of magnificent beachland…no wonder Kenya is rumoured to be the site of the fabled Garden of Eden.
Organised safaris are the best way to capture the exhilarating, majestic sights of Kenya's animal world in their own wild, native environment.
Beautiful, but often brutal, nature is freed from the watchful control of man, and is totally at one with itself and its sometimes grisly inhabitants, whose primary motivation is day-to-day survival.
On Kenya's border with Tanzania are the internationally known Serengeti and Maasai Mara reserves, where the annual migration of millions of wildebeeste and zebras to warmer northern parts forms a wondrous spectacle straight out of the pages of ‘Out of Africa’.
The country's thirty-seven magnificent national parks — taking up one tenth of Kenya's land area and covering all types of terrain from forestland to desert — display the natural beauty of the landscape before ‘civilisation’ by man.
It is in these far-reaching acres of wilderness that the greatest glory of the country is to be found — the untamed wildlife which proliferates here.
Lions, wildebeeste, giraffes, buffalo and boldly-marked birdlife dot the dramatic landscapes in a country where almost eleven months of sunshine a year is all but guaranteed.
Beachlovers will be delighted with the magnificent coastline and such fine resorts as Malindi, Mombasa and Watamu lying along silky golden sands.
VIEW TO KILIMANJARO
MOMBASA BEACH
Wildlife Safari
The 14 night Sovereign Wildlife Safari drives far across the Kenyan plains, visiting the huge game reserves at Samburu and Maasai Mara.
Lake Baringo is an ornithologist's paradise, and there are always remarkable views of both flora and fauna along the way.
Day 1
London–Mombasa–Nairobi
Depart London
Day 2
Nairobi
On arrival transfer to the Norfolk Hotel, Nairobi, for two nights.
Day 3
Nairobi
At leisure in Nairobi.
Day 4
Nairobi–Treetops
After breakfast, drive to Treetops Hotel, for one night.
Journey north through the fertile Kikuyu heartland to Nyeri where a buffet lunch will be served at the Outspan Hotel.
Continue to the world-famous Treetops Hotel, the undisputed ‘royal box’ of African wildlife safaris.
Built on stilts, the hotel overlooks a floodlit waterhole and salt lick frequented by elephant, buffalo, rhino and other forest animals.
Afternoon tea and dinner at hotel.
Day 5
Treetops–Samburu
After breakfast, depart to Samburu for two nights.
En route, lunch at Kenya's famous Mount Kenya Safari Club, arriving at Samburu in the early evening.
Day 6
Samburu
Early morning and afternoon game drives, where you will see most of the common species of African wildlife, together with those peculiar to the northern province.
These include reticulated giraffe, Grevy's zebra, beisa oryx and the graceful, longnecked gerenuk.
Day 7
Samburu–Lake Baringo
After breakfast, depart for the Lake Baringo Club, Lake Baringo, for two nights.
Enjoy the scenic drive along the floor of the Great Rift Valley, with a picnic lunch en route.
During the afternoon bird walk, escorted by the resident ornithologist, you will see some of the 400 species of bird in the Baringo area.
These vary in size from the great white pelican and goliath heron to the diminutive malachite and pygmy kingfishers.
Day 8
Lake Baringo
Join the launch trip on the lake to see hippo, crocodile and bird life.
Afternoon visit to Lake Bogoria which in recent years has been the home of the lesser flamingo.
The lake is noted for its hot springs, steam jets and geysers.
Day 9
Lake Baringo–Maasai Mara
After breakfast, drive to the Keekorok Lodge, Massai Mara fro two nights.
Stop for lunch at Lake Naivasha.
The journey to the game lodge will provide your first glimpse of the wealth of wildlife this marvellous game park has to offer.
Day 10
Maasai Mara
Full day in the reserve with morning and afternoon games drives.
The Maasai Mara and Serengeti are really one reserve divided by the Kenya/Tanzania border, and between them house thousands of plains game and their following of lion, cheetah and leopard.
Day 11
Maasai Mara–Nairobi
In the morning, leave for Nairobi, lunch is at the Norfolk hotel if flight departure allows.
Transfer to Nairobi Airport for the Kenya Airways flight to Mombasa.
Days 12–15 Mombasa
At leisure in your beach resort.
Choose between either the Nyali Beach or Lagoon Reef Hotels; please refer to the individual hotel descriptions for more information.
Day 16
Mombasa–London
Lunchtime departure for London, arriving in the evening.
The Wildlife Safari is available on both charter and scheduled services from London.
Departures: fortnightly from London starting 6 November 1989.
All Sovereign clients are guaranteed a window seat on our safari bus.
Prices are based on twin-bedded rooms on full board (on safari, half board in hotels).
FABULOUS BALLOON SAFARI
Daily from Maasai Mara
3 hours duration
An early morning hot-air balloon flight over the Maasai Mara gives the visitor an ideal opportunity to see Kenya's striking landscape from unusual slant.
Leaving early in the morning, this safari takes you high above the drifting game on the reserve in the clear morning light.
At the end of the flight, land on the plains for a champagne breakfast before the leisurely drive back to your lodge.
Daily from Maasai Mara.
Cost £150 per person.
Rate includes transfers from the lodge.
GOLD OR SILVER SERVICE
On our Boeing 757 charter flights to Mombasa you have the opportunity to upgrade to Sovereign's Silver or Gold Service, seating for which is in the front section of the aircraft.
Sovereign's Silver Service includes:
Separate check-in facility at London Gatwick.
Upgraded in-flight meal service.
Free bar offering wine, spirits and soft drinks.
Free in-flight entertainment.
15 kilo baggage allowance.
Supplement for ‘Silver Service’ £45 per person one way.
Sovereign's Golden Service includes:
3 seats for 2 passengers.
This gives you more comfort and privacy during your flight, as the middle seat in each row of 3 will not be occupied.
Everything listed for ‘Silver Service’.
Newspapers.
Amenity Pack.
Supplement for ‘Gold Service’ £139 per person one way.
YOUR SAFARI BUS
TANZANIA SAFARI
This 14 night safari gives you the chance to see the tree-climbing lions of Lake Manyara and the fabulous spectacle of Ngorongoro Crater high above the plains of Serengeti.
Day 1
London–Mombasa–Nairobi
Depart London.
Day 2
Nairobi
On arrival, transfer to the Hotel Jacaranda, Nairobi, for one night.
Rest of the day at leisure in Nairobi.
Day 3
Lake Manyara National Park
Set off from Nairobi by road through Kenyan countryside to the border at Namanga with a stop in Arusha for lunch.
Your journey then takes you to Lake Manyara National Park where the wall of the Great Rift Valley forms a backdrop for one of the loveliest soda lakes.
The Park is famous for its tree-climbing lions.
Among other species to be seen are elephants, buffalo, rhinoceros, impala, giraffe, zebra, baboons and monkeys.
The lake is also noted for its bird population and more than 350 species have been recorded.
Here you may see the beautiful sight of a huge flock of flamingos landing on the lake.
Day 4
Lake Manyara–Serengeti
Morning game drive through Lake Manyara National Park.
After lunch, your drive takes you through the Serengeti to the Olduvai Gorge where May Leakey discovered Zinjanthropus and East Africa as the origin of man.
Overnight at Ndutu.
Day 5
Seronera Wildlife Lodge
After breakfast, your game drive takes you through the park to Seronera Wildlife Lodge for lunch.
An afternoon game drive has been arranged followed by dinner and overnight at the Lodge.
Day 6
Serengeti
Today's drive takes you through the Serengeti with lunch at the Ngorongoro Wildlife Lodge.
Over 2 million animals live on the limitless plains of the Serengeti and from December to May, they are massed like an army on the shortgrass plains in the south of the park.
In late May the wildebeest and zebra move to the north and west of the park where there is permanent water.
Here they spend the next 5 months until the short rains in November when they gradually form columns and head back to the shortgrass plains.
Overnight at Ngorongoro.
Day 7
Ngorongoro Crater
A full day will be spent in the Ngorongoro Crater.
The crater rises high above the plains of the Serengeti and the caldera is the refuge of many thousands of animals and birds.
5,000 zebra, 15,000 wildebeest and 3,000 gazelle live here as well as elephants, rhinos, buffalo, lions and leopards.
Overnight at the Wildlife Lodge.
Day 8
Tarangire National Park
Early morning game drive to Tarangire National Park.
Lunch at Tarangire followed by an afternoon game drive.
Overnight at Tarangire tented camp.
Day 9
Mombasa
Drive to the border at Taveta, then on to Mombasa.
Days 10–15
Mombasa
5 days in the glorious beach resort of Mombasa in the hotel of your choice.
Day 16
Mombasa–London
Depart Mombasa on a homeward bound flight, arriving in London early evening.
The Tanzania Safari is available on both charter and scheduled services from London.
It must be combined with a 7 night stay at any one of our features Mombasa hotels.
Departures: fortnightly from London starting 13 November 1989.
All Sovereign clients are guaranteed a window seat on our safari bus.
HEMINGWAYS HOTEL Watamu
This glorious beach hotel is dedicated to the sea.
Overlooking a vast palm-studded stretch of beach along the Indian Ocean, Hemingways is an hotel of distinction, immortalised by the great American writer.
The hotel itself is divided into a main building and a cottage wing, with a typically African style thatched building serving as the excellent restaurant.
The choice of activities at this marvellous hotel is staggering, with game fishing in the hotel's own fleet of boats, snorkelling in the beautiful coral gardens, sailing in traditional dhows, windsurfing or indulging in countless other watersports.
Swimming pool
Sun terraces
Restaurant
Bar
Lounge
Watersports including deep sea fishing
All rooms are air-conditioned with balcony and sea view.
Transfer time: approx. 3 hours from Mombasa.
CHE SHALE Malindi
Situated almost at the water's edge on a deserted beach 25km north of Malindi, the emphasis at the Che Shale is very much on food and relaxation.
Bread is baked every day in a tin trunk and all food is cooked over an open fire.
The menu changes daily, though the speciality is seafood — the lobster is excellent.
Soft drinks and beer are complimentary.
Che Shale provides a relaxing holiday by the sea and congenial conversation in the evening, but it would not appeal to those seeking every modern refinement.
The plumbing is clean and effective but simple, electricity is by generator and there is a radio link to the outside world, The transfer from Malindi to the hotel is by four-wheel drive.
NB: Che Shale is closed from 20 Apr–1 Aug.
Children under 3 are not accepted at this hotel.
Windsurfing
Sailing
Snorkelling
Fishing
Scuba diving
Local excursions
Accommodation is in thatched bandas with private facilities and patio.
No. of rooms: 23
Transfer time: approx. 3½ hours from Mombasa 
Hemingways
Fishing trip from Hemingways
SAFARI BEACH HOTEL Mombasa
The Safari Beach is in a stunning location in 12 acres of tropical gardens on the long, white sands of Diani Beach about 17 miles south of Mombasa.
Accommodation is in two storey, thatched rondavel style buildings which surround an attractive pool area.
A regular bus service operates to Mombasa town.
Swimming pool
Restaurants
Bar
3 floodlit tennis courts
Squash court
Windsurfing
Snorkelling
Diving
Deep sea fishing
Children's facilities
Evening entertainment
Air-conditioned nightclub
All rooms are air-conditioned with private facilities and terrace or balcony.
No. of rooms: 186
Transfer time: approx. 1 hour
NYALI BEACH HOTEL Mombasa
Set in tropical gardens leading down to the beach, the Nyali Beach is one of Kenya's best known hotels.
The hotel, which is decorated in colonial style, offers endless culinary opportunities with its three restaurants and there is the gamut of watersports available including mini-sailing, windsurfing and water-skiing, whilst deep sea fishing trips and temporary membership with the local squash and golf club can also be arranged.
Freshwater swimming pool
3 restaurants
Coffee shop
Elegant lounges
Bars
Entertainment programme day and night
Jacuzzi
Floodlit tennis court
Watersports
Windsurfing school
Scuba diving instruction
Hairdressers
Shops
Disco
All rooms have air-conditioning, telephone, radio and mini-bar.
n
No. of rooms: 238
Transfer time: approx. 30 minutes
THE REEF Mombasa
Just six miles north of Mombasa is the beautiful Nyali Beach, where the Hotel Reef stands.
In authentic Kenya style with large, sweeping Makuti roofs, the Reef overlooks the large tropical gardens of coconut palm and has marvellous leisure and sporting facilities.
Freshwater swimming pool
Sun terrace
Poolside bar
Restaurants
Bar
Floodlit tennis court
Gymnasium
Diving and windsurfing school
Glass bottom boat trips
Shop
Hairdresser
Discotheque
Barbecues
Kenyan dancing displays
Live band
Children's pool.
No. of rooms: 168
Transfer time: approx. 30 minutes 
Pool at Safari Beach
Nyali Beach
TRAVELLERS BEACH Mombasa
A new hotel built to high standards, the Travellers Beach is just eleven kilometres north of Mombasa.
This beautiful hotel boasts spacious, elegantly furnished rooms and an unrivalled selection of facilities.
Guests find themselves spoilt for choice with a variety of dining possibilities, water sports and daily entertainment, such as films, dancing displays, reef trips and diving lessons.
Freeform swimming pool
3 restaurants
3 bars
Snack bar
Shopping arcade
Hairdressing
Beauty salon
Nightly entertainment
Disco
Floodlit tennis court
Air-conditioned squash courts
Water sports
All rooms have colour TV/video, radio, 24 hour room service, air-conditioning and balcony, some with sea view.
No. of rooms: 150
Transfer time: approx. 30 minutes
LAGOON REEF Mombasa
One of Kenya's newest resort hotels, the Lagoon Reef stands in superb position right on Diani Beach.
The hotel is surrounded by its own beautiful gardens, complete with waterfalls, fountains and a freeform, fresh water swimming pool.
Entertainment during the evenings is lively, with resident bands, barbecues and traditional African dancing displays.
Swimming pool
Restaurant
4 bars
Floodlit tennis courts
Boutique
Hairdresser
Entertainment
All rooms are air-conditioned with ceiling fan, balcony or patio.
No. of rooms: 114
Transfer time: approx. 1 hour
SOVEREIGN VALUE
FREE WEEK: 3 FOR 2
Hotel: Travellers Beach
Stay 2 weeks and have an extra week free on half board basis for arrivals between 6 Apr–31 July and 1 Sep–31 Oct.
Hotels: Lagoon Reef, Nyali Beach, Reef Hotel.
Stay 2 weeks and have an extra week free on room only for arrivals between 19 Apr–30 Jun.
Half board is compulsory for extra week.
SOLO VALUE
Hotel: Safari Beach
No supplement for singles on arrivals between 18 Apr–23 July and 28 Aug–30 Sept.
WATERSPORTS AND SPORTS
Hotels: Reef Hotel and Lagoon Reef
Guests are entitled to one free diving lesson, one free windsurfing lesson, and free daytime tennis (subject to availability).
GOURMET PACKAGE
Hotel: Safari Beach
For an additional half board supplement of £5 per person per day guests can enjoy a la carte meals in any of the six restaurants.
To be pre booked and pre paid before departure.
Lagoon Beach
Travellers Beach
EGYPT
Lying in the wake of a glorious civilisation dating back many thousands of years, the million square kilometres which make up Egypt seem to breathe history through every grain of sand.
Bordered by desert, the Mediterranean and the Red Sea, this densely populated country is concentrated along the Nile, away from the blistering heat of the hinterland, and it is here that the great monuments to the country's past civilisation lie.
Egypt is a very humbling place, with its larger-than-life statues and obelisks serenely standing since before the time of Christ, and the mammoth pyramids whose blocks of stone weigh up to forty tons each; this is a land which inspires constant awe and disbelief.
The mathematical precision which went into the development of hieroglyphics and the invention of paper resulted in an efficient and scientific method of building which still remains a mystery to modern day man.
Egypt's largest concentrations of ancient sites are around the cities of Cairo and Luxor.
Both lie within the fertile valley of the Nile, an area of lush greenery and cultivated fields, contrasting greatly with the harsh, arid desert sparsely punctuated by the odd dazzling oasis.
The impact of visiting the massive tributes to monumental Egyptian architecture at Luxor, the Valley of the Kings, Cairo's old town and many museums, and of course the great pyramids and Sphinx at Giza, will affect you and stay with you for the rest of your life.
HILTON NILE CRUISE
This splendid Sovereign tour takes you to the historic areas of Upper Egypt and the treasures of the Nile Valley.
The purpose-built cruise boats are comfortable and offer cabins with two single beds and private facilities.
One should note that the four year drought in Ethiopia is now adversely affecting the water levels in the Nile, and cruise itineraries are subject to change without notice, depending on conditions prevailing at the time.
Day 1
London Gatwick–Luxor
Depart from London Gatwick on your flight to Luxor.
On arrival transfer to the Luxor Hilton for a two night stay.
Day 2
Luxor
At leisure.
Day 3
Luxor–Aswan
Transfer by road to Aswan.
On arrival you will be met and immediately transferred tot he Hilton Nile Cruise vessel.
Overnight in Aswan on board.
Day 4
Aswan–Kom Ombo
Sightseeing this morning includes a visit to the Botanical Island and Mausoleum of Agha Khan by ‘felucca’.
Sail to Kom Ombo where a visit is made to the Ptolemic Temple which contains beautiful murals and reliefs and offers a fine view of the river.
Day 5
Kom Ombo–Edfu–Esna–Luxor
Early morning sailing to Edfu.
Visit the Temple of Horun (237 BC), the most complete example of an Egyptian temple in existence, before continuing to Esna, where a visit is made to the fascinating Temple of Esna.
Sail to Luxor where you will spend the night.
Day 6
Luxor
A day of sightseeing, including Thebes Necropolis, Valley of the Kings and the Tomb of Tutankhamun.
Visit the romantic Valley of the Nobles, the Valley of the Queens, the Temple of Medinet Habu and the famous Colossi of  Memnon which faces the Nile.
Evening free.
Overnight at Luxor.
Day 7
Luxor–Denderah–Luxor
Sail early this morning to Denderah.
A visit is made to Denderah and Abydos by bus.
The Temples of Hatour and Seti I, Ramses II and the Osireion may be seen before the return by boat to Luxor.
Evening free.
Overnight at Luxor.
Day 8
Luxor–London
Transfer to Luxor Airport for your return flight to London Gatwick.
NB: On alternate dates, this holiday is reversed ie. cruise followed by stay in Luxor.
For passengers travelling on scheduled services, the itinerary is as follows: 3 nights Ramses Hilton, 5 nights cruise, 2 nights Luxor Hilton, 2 nights Cairo Marriott.
Departures: Weekly from London Gatwick starting 7 November 1989.
Sunset near Tel El Amarna
The Sphinx
PRESIDENTIAL NILE CRUISE
After 3 nights in Cairo, giving you the opportunity to explore the city and the Pyramids at Giza, fly south to Aswan to join the ‘Nile Symphony’ and embark on your 10 night cruise.
Visit the ancient temples and the tombs of the Pharaohs as your cruise ship sails down the Nile to Esna, Luxor, the West Bank and El Amarna before arriving back in Cairo ready for your flight home the following day.
A leisurely cruise with plenty of Egyptian history to absorb.
Day 1
London–Cairo
Depart from London.
On arrival in Cairo you will be met by our representative and transferred to the Marriott Hotel situated on Gezira Island overlooking the Nile.
Day 2
Cairo
A full day tour has been arranged to the pyramids, Sphinx and Saqqara.
Lunch is not included.
Day 3
Cairo
A half day tour has been arranged to the Egyptian Museum and Citadel.
The evening ‘Son et Lumiere’ performance at the Pyramids is also recommended.
Day 4
Cairo–Aswan
Fly from Cairo to Aswan and transfer to the Nile Symphony.
Embarkation will be before lunch.
There is an optional excursion to Abu Simbel, reservations for which must be made at the time of booking your holiday.
(Price per person: £75).
At Abu Simbel you will see the famous Rock Temples recently rescued from the rising waters of the Nile behind the Aswan Dam.
After lunch you will visit the Botanical Gardens and Aga Khan's Mausoleum by felucca — an Egyptian sailing boat.
Dinner and overnight on board.
Day 5
Aswan–Kom Ombo–Edfu
Morning visit to the High Dam and Temple of Philae.
After your return the ship will sail to Kom Ombo where you will visit the Ptolemic Temple of Kom Ombo, which offers beautiful murals and reliefs as well as fine views of the river.
Sail on to Edfu where you will spend the night.
Day 6
Edfu–Esna–Luxor
This morning you will visit the Temple of Horus (237 BC).
This is the most complete example of an Egyptian temple in existence.
Sail to Esna where you will visit the Temple of Esna before passing through the lock of Esna and sailing on to Luxor for dinner and overnight.
Day 7
Luxor–West Bank
Sightseeing includes the Thebes Necropolis, the Valley of the Kings, Queens and Nobles and the Tomb of Tutankhamun.
You will also visit the Temples of Medinet Habu and Queen Hatshepsut and the Colossi of Memnon.
Your visit to the West Bank of the Nile will be a memorable experience.
Day 8
Luxor (Karnak) –Denderah
Morning sightseeing includes the great Temple of Luxor (18th Dynasty) and Karnak, started in the 20th Century BC and enlarged by successive Pharaohs as a fantastic city for Amun and his priests.
Dinner and overnight on board.
In the afternoon the ship will sail to Denderah/Quena.
Day 9
Denderah–Abydos–Sohag
You will take a bus to Denderah where you will visit the Temple of Hathor and continue to Abydos to see the Temple of Seti I, Ramses II and the Osireion.
You will meet the boat at the lock of Nag Hammadi and sail on to Sohag — the capital of the province of Girga.
Day 10
Sohag–El Amarna
Today you will have the chance to relax on board watching the scenery and local life along the banks of the Nile.
Day 11
El Amarna–Beni Hassan
Today you will have the opportunity to visit Tell El-Amarna a city built by Akhenaton (18th Dynasty).
The Necropolis is situated to the North and South of the city and the tombs are decorated in a realistic and intimate style showing life in the city of Aten.
Travel by bus crossing the Nile to Tuna El Gebel.
From Tuna El Gebel you will visit the city of Hermopoulos Magna and see the Temple of Thoth founded by Amenophis III and the Greek Agora.
You journey continues by bus to join the boat to Beni Hassan.
Day 12
Beni Hassan–Beni Sweif
This morning you will visit the most important of the 39 tombs quarried out of the hillside built by the provincial princes of this district in 11th and 12th Dynasties.
Return to the boat and sail to Beni Sweif for overnight.
Day 13
Beni Sweif–Cairo
A day to relax watching the scenery as the boat continues to Cairo arriving in the evening.
Day 14
Cairo–London
Transfer to Cairo Airport for your flight to London.
N.B. On certain departures the cruise will operate from Cairo to Aswan.
On these departures 2 nights will be spent at the Cairo Marriott prior to embarking on your Presidential Cruise vessel, and the cruise itinerary will be reversed.
After the cruise, you will fly from Aswan to Cairo and overnight at the Cairo Marriott, flying back to London the following day.
Note: A tour of Egypt is a unique and fascinating experience but cannot be described as leisurely.
It is important to dress comfortably, with shoes that are suitable for walking over fairly rough ground.
Departures: 1 April; 9 May, 8 June; 8, 18 July; 7 August; 6, 16 September; 16 October; 5, 15 November.
Feluccas on the Nile
Camels at the Pyramids
Minarets by night
CAIRO
The best place to survey Cairo is from the top of the Cairo Tower where one can survey the whole teeming, colourful metropolis built upon the foundations of the legendary city of Babylon.
The Old Town harbours a sundry collection of churches, mansions, synagogues, palaces and mosques, winding their way around the narrow lanes and hidden nooks, beckoning the adventurer into the shadows.
Haunting the city from across the Nile are the three Great Pyramids and the Sphinx, these colossal constructions have guarded the desert border for over three and a half thousand years.
 PHARAOH'S EXPRESS
Aswan (4 nts) Train (1 nt) Cairo (4 nts) Train (1 nt) Luxor (4 nts)
Day 1
Tue London–Aswan
Leave London Gatwick on a direct flight to Luxor.
Transfer to the Hotel Cataract in Aswan, where you will spend the next four nights.
Days 2–4
Wed–Fri Aswan
These days can be spent exploring the town of Aswan, a peaceful place with an abundance of historical sites.
A selection of optional excursions is available to local landmarks such as the Temple of Philae, Aga Khan's mausoleum and the Aswan Dam.
Day 5
Sat Aswan–Cairo
Another free day before taking the overnight train to Cairo.
An evening meal and breakfast are taken in your compartment, and a Club car is also available for drinks and snacks.
Days 6–9
Sun–Wed Cairo
The many faces of Cairo await you with four full days to explore this exciting city.
A wide range of optional excursions is offered, from trips to the Sphinx and pyramids at Giza to a tour of the museum which houses Tutankhamun's treasures.
An optional sound and light show at the pyramids will prove the highlight of your stay in Cairo.
While in Cairo stay a the Ramses Hilton.
Day 10
Thu Cairo–Luxor
Before taking the overnight express train to Luxor, spend a day in Cairo at your leisure.
Take the evening meal and breakfast in your compartment, and use the Club car for drinks and snacks.
Days 11–14
Fri–Mon Luxor
The preserve of the rich thousands of years ago, Luxor is the resting place of many monumental palaces and temples.
Visit the Temples of Karnak, the Valley of the Kings and Tutankhamun's burial chambers.
You will also be able to visit the temples of Ramses II and Abu Simbel as optional tours.
This tour is pre-bookable in the UK.
Overnight at the Hotel Etap.
Day 15
Tue Luxor–London
Leave Luxor for a direct flight to London Gatwick.
Departures: Weekly from 7 November 1989.
RAMSES HILTON Cairo
As the tallest building in Cairo, the ultra-modern Ramses Hilton commands a magnificent view of Cairo, the pyramids of Giza and the tranquil Nile.
Egypt's ancient past is impressively recreated in the hotel's interiors with its rooms adorned with original Egyptian paintings and ceramics, which will certainly give you a taste for the Egyptian Museum just across the road.
Lounges
Restaurants
Bars
Nightclub
Swimming pool
Sun terraces
Health club
Gymnasium
Shops
Hairdressing salon
All rooms are air-conditioned with private facilities.
Transfer time: approx. 30 minutes from Cairo
MARRIOTT HOTEL
First opened in 1982, this magnificent hotel is undoubtedly one of the most luxurious and well-equipped in the Middle East.
Occupying a peaceful position on Gezira Island with excellent views of the Nile, the Marriott is surrounded by spacious gardens adjacent to Cairo's exclusive golf club.
The hotel is built around a nineteenth-century palace, with covered walkways to the modern bedroom wings.
Lounges
Coffee shops
Restaurants
Fitness centre
Indoor and outdoor swimming pools
Tennis courts
Nightclub
Casino
All rooms are air-conditioned with private facilities.
Transfer time: approx. 30 minutes from Cairo.
THE PYRAMIDS AT GIZA
TUTANKHAMUN'S MASK
TUTANKHAMUN'S TREASURE
LUXOR
This city is regarded as Egypt's most extensive outdoor museum, with a mass array of magnificently preserved temples, palaces, halls and obelisks.
Some 700 kilometres south of Cairo, Luxor's palaces and temples still command awe.
The Temple of Luxor, with its distinctive columns shaped like bundles of papyrus, overlooks the tree-lined waterfront of the Nile; close by is the massive complex of Karnak, the largest place of worship known to man, an intricate combination of ram-headed sphinxes, labyrinth passageways and chambers, whose detail has hardly been affected by the elements over thousands of years.
On the opposite bank of the river are the Valleys of the Kings and Queens, a vast burial ground containing the tombs of such greats as Tutankhamun, Ramses III and IV.
LUXOR PLUS
No holiday to Egypt is complete without a visit to Cairo, the busy, bustling capital of this ancient country and a sightseer's delight.
Visit the celebrated pyramids and Sphinx, the Egyptian Museum and some of the many mosques that characterise the region.
Our tour, the Luxor Plus, allows you to do just this.
Extend your stay and travel, by air, to Cairo, for a 3 night stay, before returning to Luxor for a final 4 nights to unwind.
Day 1
Tue Luxor–Cairo
Transfer to Luxor Airport for your flight on Egyptair to Cairo.
On arrival you will be met and transferred to the Ramses Hilton Hotel for the next three nights.
Days 2–3
Wed–Thu Cairo
At leisure to explore this lively city.
Day 4
Fri Cairo–Luxor
Fly to Luxor where you will be met and transferred to the Luxor Hilton for a four night stay.
Days 5–7 Sat–Mon Luxor
At leisure.
Day 8
Tue Luxor–London
Transfer to Luxor Airport for your return flight to London Gatwick.
Departures: Weekly from 7 November 1989.
NB: The Luxor Plus can be booked on its own as a 7 night holiday.
LUXOR NOVOTEL Luxor
This brand new hotel, part of the world renowned Novotel chain of hotels, has an enviable position right in the centre of Luxor, overlooking the River Nile.
It is just a short walk from the Temple of Luxor (300 yards) and is within easy reach of the local bazaar and museum, providing a perfect base from which to explore this fascinating city full of historic sights.
Outdoor swimming pool
Sun terrace
Poolside snack bar
Garden area
Two restaurants
Bar
Shops and boutiques
Table tennis
Darts
All rooms have air-conditioning, video and TV, telephone.
No. of rooms: 245
Transfer time: approx. 30 minutes
HILTON HOTEL Luxor
Situated directly on the eastern bank of the mighty River Nile near the village of Karnak, the prestigious Hilton name more than lives up to its reputation here.
The hotel is surrounded by palm-studded gardens, and has a disco club and sailing jetty.
The hotel is convenient for the airport and for excursions across the river to the Valleys of the Kings and Queens.
Swimming pool
Pool/terrace cafe
Landscaped gardens
Restaurant serving international and local dishes
Lounge
Bars
Tennis court
Watersports available nearby (waterskiing, sailing)
Shops
Children's play area
Baby-sitting available locally on request
Ballroom
Casino
Disco club
All rooms have direct dial telephone, radio, mini-bar, colour TV, balconies and air-conditioning.
No. of rooms: 257
Transfer time: approx. 40 minutes 
Rameses II, Karnak Temple
NORTH AMERICA
CALIFORNIA
Straddling the azure magnificence of San Francisco Bay, the Golden Gate Bridge stands as an icon to the sun-loving, glossy sophistication of West Coast civilisation.
The coast is not only renowned for its warm, open lifestyle, but also for the high-class glitz afforded by the Beverly Hills and Malibu set.
Surrounded by small seaside resorts and redwood avenues is San Francisco, a cosmopolitan town whose many nationalities have inspired a host of restaurants.
Further along the Pacific coast is Los Angeles, which has dazzled the world as supreme creator of the Hollywood legend, immortalising glamour and feeding the minds of twentieth century filmgoers.
Slick sophistication is only too evident in the glittering Nevada oasis of Las Vegas, while the dry desertland of Arizona houses the gargantuan Grand Canyon, where the Colorado River winds its perilous way through the sheer plunging walls of rock.
THE WESTIN ST.
FRANCIS San  Francisco 
Located at the very heart of San Francisco on Union Square, this elegant and historic hotel is arguably San Francisco's finest, and offers a wide range of facilities and excellent accommodation to the discerning traveller.
A combination of impeccable service, lavishly decorated public rooms and fine cuisine make the St. Francis a landmark in itself.
Restaurants
Bars
Coffee shops
Meeting rooms and ballrooms
5 outdoor glass tower lifts
Shops
Nightly entertainment
All rooms are fully air-conditioned with private facilities.
No. of rooms: 1200
THE ATHERTON San Francisco
This charming hotel concentrates on the comfort and personal needs of guests.
In classically elegant surroundings, guests are treated with attention and friendliness, and will appreciate the excellent food and drink at the hotel.
The small but nicely furnished rooms of the Atherton offer good value for money.
Restaurant
Lounge
Nightly hospitality hour
Wine and hors d'oeuvres reception
All rooms have colour television, in-house videos and room service.
No. of rooms: 90
HOLIDAY INN FISHERMAN'S WHARF San Francisco
On Columbus Avenue near the waterfront and just a short stroll from Pier 39 and Ghiradelli Square, the friendly Fisherman's Wharf is a medium-sized hotel within easy walking distance of many of San Francisco's major attractions.
With comfortable rooms and a good choice of relaxing venues within the hotel including Charley's Restaurant, this is an ideal base to see the city.
Swimming pool
Restaurant
Coffee shop
Lounge
Bar
Free parking.
No. of rooms: 580 
Grand Canyon, Arizona
Downtown, San Francisco
Chinatown, LA
GOLDEN NUGGET HOTEL/CASINO Las Vegas
The elegance and yesteryear style of the Golden Nugget confront you as soon as you step across the threshold of this lavish hotel/casino.
Chandeliers, gilt furniture and marble pillars display the opulence of one of the finest hotel/casinos in the world, and the cabaret and superb restaurants will rival the gaming tables of the casino as the highlight of your stay here.
Indoor swimming pool
5 restaurants
Casino
Cabaret
Spa
Boutique
Gift shop.
QUALITY INN HOTEL Anaheim
Located adjacent to the Anaheim Convention Center and just two blocks from Disneyland, the Quality Inn Hotel is conveniently placed for the tourist and offers comfortable accommodation at good value for money.
Swimming pool
Cafe
Restaurant
Lounge
Evening entertainment
All rooms are air-conditioned with colour television, telephone and private facilities.
No. of rooms: 284
HOLLYWOOD ROOSEVELT HOTEL Hollywood
Named the ‘Home of the Stars’ when it opened in 1927, this glamorous hotel has recently been restored to all its former glory.
This classic Spanish revival building is unique in its elegance and flamboyance, whilst also being within easy reach of many major attractions, including Universal Studios, Disneyland, Beverly Hills and the Hollywood Bowl.
Swimming pool
Lounge
Live cabaret
Restaurant
Jacuzzi
Poolside bar
Meeting and banqueting rooms
All rooms are fully air-conditioned with private facilities.
No. of rooms: 400
CALIFORNIAN CAR HIRE
Add an extra dimension to your holiday in California by hiring a car.
If you book and pay for your car hire before you depart, Sovereign can offer you excellent savings on local resort prices.
Please note that car hire is not bookable on Viewdata.
Please call our Reservations Department for further details.
PAN PACIFIC OF ANAHEIM Los Angeles
A real gem just two minutes from Disneyland's Monorail station, the Pan Pacific is a spectacular hotel.
From the sunlit atrium with its glass elevator to the tasteful rooms and thoughtful service, this hotel shines with refined comfort.
There are three restaurants, serving everything from traditional American to Japanese fare.
Outdoor swimming pool
Indoor pool
3 restaurants
Sidewalk cafe
Sun deck
Whirlpool spa.
No. of rooms: 505
SOVEREIGN TWO-CENTRE
CALIFORNIA/HAWAII
Combine your visit to Los Angeles or San Francisco with a stay on one of the beautiful Hawaiian Islands.
See pages 54–55 for further details.
Oak Creek Canyon
Yosemite National Park
WEST COAST
GOLDEN WEST TOUR
Day 1
London–Los Angeles
Depart London for Los Angeles.
Upon arrival you will be met and assisted in transferring to your Los Angeles hotel.
Days 2–7
Los Angeles
You have six days to explore the City of Angels and you will not be disappointed.
Visit the magical kingdom of Disneyland, Knotts Berry Farm's display of life in the wild west or Universal Studios.
Marvel at the homes of the wealthy and famous or choose to relax on a sandy beach in the Californian sun.
Days 8–10
Las Vegas
From Los Angeles, fly to the glittering lights of Las Vegas in the Nevada Desert.
In this world-famous entertainment centre, enjoy lavish stage shows, excellent food or have an flutter in one of the many casinos.
Included in your tour is a 1 day excursion to the Grand Canyon by air — the breathtaking views awaiting you will remain vivid long after your holiday is over.
Days 11–14
San Francisco
Leave Las Vegas by air for San Francisco — this city has an atmosphere which is quite unique.
Spend four days seeing the sights of Union Square, Chinatown, Fisherman's Wharf and the charming bay area, best discovered in traditional fashion aboard a cable car.
Day 15
Today you will be transferred to San Francisco airport for your return flight to London, or why not extend your holiday with a week on one of the Hawaiian Islands?
See pages 54–55.
Departures on Fridays: 3 November 1989–16 November 1990.
The shining lights of Las Vegas
San Francisco
Beverley Hills, Los Angeles
HAWAIIAN COMBINATIONS
Lying in the sparkling Pacific, the volcanic islands which make up Hawaii are a small slice of sophisticated Americana mixed with warm tropical breezes, coconut trees and magnificent beaches.
Choose to split your stay in Hawaii with time discovering the West Coast of the States — Los Angeles or San Francisco's lively streets and countless attractions prove a perfect foil for a lazy week on the idyllic hideaways of Maui or Kauai.
These are a selection of our most popular Hawaiian Combinations; however, should you wish to plan your own itinerary, please call our Reservations Department for further information.
Waimea Bay, Oahu
Chinatown, San Francisco
Waimea Falls, Oahu
THE PACIFIC
HAWAIIAN ISLANDS
Far out in the Pacific is a scattering of a dozen volcanic islands known as Hawaii, America's fiftieth state.
Here, the cosmopolitan exists side by side with the exotic, the cultures of the Orient and Polynesia blend with the sophistication of the Western world.
The islands still belie their molten origins, with craggy cliffs and spectacular craters giving way to lush valleys and silky beaches.
Oahu boasts the swinging, high-rise resort of Waikiki Beach in Honolulu, favourite with slick jet setters who enjoy a fast-moving lifestyle and cosmopolitan atmosphere.
The surf here is renowned, with a stream of persistent youngsters fighting the elements to ride the waves.
But away form the bustle of Waikiki, there is much to see, including ancient Polynesian villages, museums or secluded beaches.
The ‘Valley Isle’, Maui, is perhaps the most splendid of the Hawaiian Islands, with sparkling waterfalls, hidden coves and sun-drenched, deserted beaches.
The tiny port of Lahaina is the island's ancient capital, vividly depicting days of native royalty, tireless missionaries and whaling men.
Notable is the outstanding, densely-wooded Haleakala National Park which leads down to the sea.
The greenery of the ‘Garden Isle’ makes the almost circular Kauai like a technicolour display of exotic plants.
Lush valleys, reddish-brown canyons and golden sandy beaches make this island a vision to behold.
Discover the many parks, valleys and canyons, the five botanical gardens and the eerie caves at Haena.
HAWAIIAN REGENT Oahu
This award-winning hotel rests in 5.3 acres of tropical greenery right across from the famed Waikiki Beach.
Boasting the finest in accommodation, cuisine and amenities, this hotel is attractively laid out around lush courtyards with attractively landscaped pools and terraces.
Choose from the six superb restaurants, two bars or ocean terrace, where there is entertainment at night.
The hotel's attention to details stretches to such thoughtful touches as leaving a fresh orchid placed on your pillow each night.
2 freshwater swimming pools
Championship laykold tennis court
Bars/lounges
6 restaurants
Discotheque
Shops
Nightly entertainment
All rooms are air-conditioned with refrigerator, colour TV and private facilities.
No. of rooms: 1,350 
Iao Needle, Maui
Lahaina sunset
HAWAIIAN ISLANDS CAR HIRE
Add an extra dimension to your holiday in the Hawaiian Islands by hiring a car.
If you book and pay for your car hire before you depart, Sovereign can offer you excellent savings on local resort prices.
Please note that car hire is not bookable on Viewdata.
Please call our Reservations Department for further details.
HILTON HAWAIIAN VILLAGE Oahu
The massive, high-class complex of the Hawaiian Village really is a world within itself.
On the best stretch of beautiful Waikiki Beach, this hotel lies in 22 acres of well tended gardens with gushing waterfalls and swaying palms forming a backdrop to the pool.
Live entertainment, bars and restaurants are easy to find here, and there are over 100 shops within the Village.
Swimming pools
Restaurants
Lounges
Live entertainment
Rainbow Bazaar.
No. of rooms: 2,522
ROYAL LAHAINA Maui
A beautiful hotel in the glorious, three mile long Kaanapali Beach, the Royal Lahaina is located in fifty acres of attractive and well-kept native gardens, overlooking the beautiful beachfront.
The hotel has many excellent sporting opportunities, and the resort itself offers tennis, golf and horse riding.
7 swimming pools
Championship tennis ranch
Golf course
Restaurants
Bars
All rooms are air-conditioned with private facilities.
No. of rooms: 724
SHERATON KAUAI Kauai
In twenty acres of gardens, the Sheraton lies on Poipou's most beautiful beach around sparkling lagoons.
Typical Polynesian huts are scattered throughout the grounds, each with its own lanai giving substantial views towards the ocean, and the complex has a choice of fine restaurants and bars for intimate meals or more lively evenings.
2 swimming pools
Poolside bar
5 restaurants
2 snack shops
3 cocktail lounges
Live entertainment
Sand dancing nightly
3 tennis courts
Golf nearby.
No. of rooms: 456
ON A SHOESTRING
OUTRIGGER MALIA Oahu
On Kuhio Avenue, just two blocks from Waikiki's splendid beach, is the comfortable Outrigger Malia.
Close to the many restaurants and bars in the area, this hotel offers good facilities and excellent value for money.
Guests may also use the facilities of any of Waikiki's 17 other Outrigger hotels.
Rooftop tennis court
Jacuzzi
Lounges/bars
Restaurants
Coffee shop
Cocktail lounge
Nightly entertainment
Shops
Laundry
All rooms are fully air-conditioned with private facilities, refrigerator, colour TV and telephone.
No. of rooms: 328
SOVEREIGN TWO-CENTRE
HAWAII/CALIFORNIA
Combine your visit to the Hawaiian Islands with a stay in California.
See pages 58–59 for further details.
Aloha
Hilton Hawaiian Village
Sheraton Kauai
Waikiki Beach
Yosemite National Park, California
Cinderella's Castle, Disneyland c 1989 The Walt Disney Company
NORTH AMERICA
WESTERN DISCOVERY
An area of great diversity, grandeur and fun, the USA's West Coast has enough to keep most people enthralled for a lifetime.
From the fantasy of Disneyland to the monumental Grand Canyon, the neon lights of Las Vegas to the bushland of Yosemite National Park, this region bursts with excitement and glamour.
Day 1
London–Los Angeles
Depart London for Los Angeles.
You will be met and assisted in transferring to your hotel.
Day 2
Los Angeles
At leisure to explore the delights of this bustling city.
Day 3
Anaheim
At leisure.
Optional tour exploring Disneyland and all its delightful characters in this magical world, or take a trip to Universal Studios to discover the secrets of the movies.
Day 4
Anaheim–Tiajuana–San Diego
Today your American Tours motorcoach will pick you up from the hotel lobby at 8am.
Travel south to San Diego seeing San Juan Capistrano, an old Spanish Mission and San Clemente, home of former President, Richard Nixon.
Cross the border by the afternoon and stop in Tijuana.
Overnight hotel is the Hanalei Resort or Hacienda in San Diego.
Day 5
San Diego–Phoenix/Scottsdale
This morning, drive through Cleveland National Forest before crossing Imperial Valley and entering Arizona by way of the Yuma Desert.
On to Phoenix, one of the fastest growing cities in the West and the fun resort of Scottsdale.
Overnight at the Holiday Inn.
Day 6
Phoenix/Scottsdale–Grand Canyon
Today's drive takes you through some wonderful scenery as you follow the Black Canyon Highway as it climbs to Montezuma's Castle, one of the most perfectly preserved of the ancient Indian cliff dwellings.
The day  culminates with your arrival at the Grand Canyon, one of the natural wonders of the world.
The late afternoon and evening will give you time to stroll along the South Rim and absorb the magnificence of the plunging gorges, multi-coloured rock formations and the winding Colorado River.
An optional helicopter ride down the canyon can be arranged for you by your escort.
Overnight at a Grand Canyon Lodge.
Day 7
Grand Canyon–Monument Valley–Lake Powell
Catch the sunrise, a stunningly colourful experience on a clear day as the morning light reflects on the rocks bringing out an array of unforgettable colour, before setting off for the Navajo Indian Reservation and the trading Post of Cameron.
You will then pass through the painted Desert and the truly fantastic Monument Valley with its sheer red sandstone spires and monoliths each rising hundreds of metres above the valley floor.
Continue to beautiful Lake Powell and stay overnight at the Holiday Inn or similar.
Day 8
Lake Powell–Bryce Canyon–Ruby's Inn
Today you will travel through Utah to arrive at Bryce Canyon where you will be able to view the multi-coloured world of sandstone spires and pinnacles.
Stay overnight at the Ruby Inn, Bryce Canyon Pines or similar.
Day 9
Bryce Canyon–Zion National Park–Las Vegas
This morning the tour heads towards the Zion National Park, carved by the wind.
Massive rock formations, mountains and deep canyons present splendid views of nature's work.
Then onto the bright lights of Las Vegas where the glittering shows, the gambling and the fun continues 24 hours a day.
Your hotel at this man-made entertainment capital will be the Las Vegas Hilton.
Optional evening tour of the ‘strip’ available with visits to the major casinos.
Day 10
Las Vegas–Mammoth Lakes or Sequoia National Park
Travel during the summer months along the eastern side of the Sierra Nevada Mountains and continue on to Mammoth Lakes, a resort town where the overnight stay will be at the Mammoth Mountain Inn.
During winter, travel by way of the Mojave Desert along the western side of the Sierra Nevadas to Sequoia National Park, overnight at the Giant Forest Lodge.
Day 11
Mammoth Lakes of Sequoia–Yosemite National Park
This morning drive from Mammoth Lakes or Sequoia to Yosemite.
Rest of the day at leisure.
Time to explore the wonders of Yosemite Valley, a truly wonderful park which is one of America's favourites.
Overnight at the Yosemite Lodge or similar.
Day 12
Yosemite National Park–San Francisco
Today drive to San Francisco, a city famous for its cable cars, the Golden Gate Bridge and notorious Alcatraz.
On arrival you will be taken on a tour of the city, including Union Square, Golden Gate Park and Fisherman's Wharf for views across the beautiful bay.
The evening ends early in the evening at the Holiday Inn Civic Centre where you will stay for three nights.
Day 13
San Francisco
At leisure.
A chance to explore on your own the beautiful bay area, perhaps by boat, and to wander along Fisherman's Wharf, through Ghiradelli Square and Chinatown.
Day 14
San Francisco–Monterey–Santa Barbara
A pleasant drive this morning to Monterey through Cannery Row, the colourful setting of John Steinbeck's novel; stop at charming Carmel before continuing along Pacific Coast Highway, which affords stunning views of California's rugged coastline.
Overnight in Santa Barbara.
Day 15
Santa Barbara–Los Angeles
Enjoy a morning drive through this quaint town with its Mediterranean climate and Spanish architecture.
Continue to Los Angeles via Ventura and Thousand Oaks.
Upon arrival in Los Angeles enjoy a city tour which takes in Mann's Chinese Theater, Sunset Strip, Hollywood and parts of Beverly Hills.
This afternoon you have the opportunity to take an optional tour to Universal Studios where you can see the film sets of your favourite TV shows and famous movies.
Overnight in Los Angeles.
Day 16
Los Angeles–London
Make your own way to the airport for departure for London.
Departures on Wednesdays: 27 December, 10 and 24 January, 7 and 21 February, 7 and 21 March, 4 and 18 April.
Departures on Fridays: 4 and 18 May, 1, 15 and 29 June, 13 and 27 July, 10 and 24 August, 7 and 21 September, 5 and 19 October.
Sunset over the Grand Canyon
Monument Valley, Arizona
NEW ENGLAND CONNECTION
Slow and refined, the New England way of life seems far removed from the frenzied pace of Los Angeles or San Francisco, as the people cling proudly to their strong links with the past.
Ablaze with brightly hued foliage, rolling hills, jagged cliffs and tiny fishing villages, this regions harks back to the Mother Country, with the added attraction of all the diversity that America can offer.
In a fast-moving twentieth century world, the fact that Boston guards its colonial ties and sense of tradition with pride is not out of place in this restored pocket of the past.
New York makes for a glaring contrast, its sky-scraping towers and constantly changing moods stamping this whirlpool of a metropolis with an excitement and energy the world has rarely seen; Washington DC acts as a statement of political dominance, retaining a cool air of refined detachment in its stately buildings and gracious avenues.
Beyond the gushing grandeur of Niagara Falls lies the scenic splendour of Canada, a vast country whose great cities — Montreal, Toronto, Quebec and Ottawa — mirror its fascinating Anglo-French past and also herald the future with an array of architecture spanning several centuries.
New York's distinctive skyline
The stance of liberty
City Hall, Toronto
NEW ENGLAND CONNECTION
This spectacular tour offers you the chance to explore the eastern coast of the USA and Canada.
Leafy New England, historic Boston and the ‘Big Apple’ are just a taste of what we have to offer you.
Read on and whet your appetite for the ‘New England Connection’…
Day 1
London–New York
Depart London for New York.
You will be met on arrival and given assistance in transferring to your hotel.
Day 2
New York–Boston
At 0800 hours, we leave New York behind and head for historic New England.
The journey today parallels the Long Island Sound and continues on through Hartford.
Then it's on to the state of Massachusetts for today's destination, Boston.
An early afternoon arrival at Quincey Market will be followed by a short drive through parts of America's most historic city.
Day 3
Boston–New England–Quebec
Today's journey takes you through the New England states of New Hampshire and Maine before crossing the international border into Canada.
Continue to Quebec City, an old walled city divided into two parts: the picturesque old quarter built entirely on a cliff, and the lower town spreading up the St. Charles River Valley.
Day 4
Quebec–Montreal
This morning, a walking tour of the walled city of Quebec will reveal the history of this almost impregnable fort.
Leave Quebec and continue to Montreal where a brief city tour introduces you to Old Montreal and the French Quarter.
Day 5
Montreal–Ottawa– ‘1,000 Islands’ –Toronto
Depart Montreal for the capital of Canada, Ottawa .
This beautiful city of parks and flowers boasts one of the most impressive parliament buildings in the world.
After lunch, drive to the Saint Lawrence River and the ‘1,000 Islands’.
Continue to Lake Ontario and arrive in Toronto by the late afternoon.
Day 6
Toronto–Niagara Falls
A drive through Toronto this morning passing some of its famous sights such as City Hall, Parliament and Toronto's harbourfront.
The tour returns to the United States and continues to the thundering Niagara Falls, and then to Buffalo.
Day 7
Buffalo–Gettysburg
Cross the state of New York into Pennsylvania.
Drive through the rolling farmland along the Susquehanna River to Harrisburg.
Then we enter the famous city of Gettysburg, site of the last and most decisive battle of the Civil War.
View the Confederate and Union fighting grounds; impressive burial memorials and location of Abraham Lincoln's historic Gettysburg address.
Day 8
Gettysburg–Lancaster–Washington D.C.
This morning, your escort will take you through the beautiful countryside to the heart of Pennsylvania Dutch country, home to the Amish — known as the ‘plain people’ who have strived to maintain a tradition of simple rural living.
During the afternoon, we continue to Washington D.C.
Day 9
Washington D.C.
This morning enjoy a colourful tour of America's most beautiful city to view such highlights as the US Capitol, Supreme Court and Lincoln's Memorial.
Glimpse the White House, then we continue across the Potomac River into Virginia to Arlington National Cemetery.
You will walk to the Kennedy Gravesite which is ever marked by the Eternal Flame.
Return to Washington and spend the rest of the day at leisure.
Day 10
Washington D.C.–New York
Transfer today to New York and end your tour in central Manhattan, where you will spend 3 nights.
Days 11, 12 & 13
New York
Enjoy 3 days at leisure in the ‘Big Apple’.
The Statue of Liberty, Central Park, The Lights of Broadway and New York's world famous skyline are just some of the attractions.
As for entertainment, what more could you want with over 25,000 restaurants and 400 theatres to choose from?
Day 13
New York–London Make your own way from your hotel to the airport for your return to London.
Departures on Mondays: 9 and 23 April, 7 and 21 May, 4 and 18 Jun, 2, 16 and 30 July, 13 and 27 August, 10 and 24 September, 8 and 22 October.
Horseshoe Falls, Niagara
Capitol Building, Washington, DC
The blazing Manhattan skyline
CANADA
A massive country spanning five time zones and stretching from the Pacific to the Atlantic, this vast land harbours towering mountains, lakes of enormous proportions, wide open prairies and the Arctic Circle.
The familiar pine-clad mountain scene with pristine snow-capped peaks and shimmering streams is not just an image reserved for biscuit boxes.
The Rockies, Great Lakes and the gargantuan Niagara Falls lend an air of immense grandeur and beauty to this former French outpost, now a bilingual land which maintains strong ties with both the British and French cultures.
Compare the English traditions of Toronto and Ottawa with the decidedly Gallic flavour of Montreal and historic Quebec City.
The Kicking Horse River, Columbia
Vancouver
Parliament Buildings at night, Victoria
View towards Lake Louise
EASTERN EXPLORER
A 12 night tour by coach
From the great cities in the east to the spectacular Niagara Falls, the Eastern Explorer will offer you a wealth of changing vistas as mile upon mile of your journey unfolds from inside a comfortable motorcoach.
Day 1
London–Toronto
Depart London for Toronto, where you should make your own way to the Delta Chelsea Inn.
Day 2
Toronto
Enjoy the highlights of Toronto with a morning tour of the city, including a trip to the top of the CN Tower.
A free afternoon to explore is followed by a welcome party.
Overnight in the Delta Chelsea Inn.
Day 3
Toronto–Kingston
Drive east to Lake Ontario, set in miles of rolling farmland.
Once at the 1,000 Island Resort region, embark on a cruise aboard the lake's still waters.
Overnight at the Confederation Place Hotel.
Day 4
Kingston–Montreal
Travel east for Morrisburg and Upper Canada Village.
On to Montreal for a tour of Canada's second City.
Overnight at Le Grand Hotel.
Day 5
Montreal–Quebec City
Either opt for a free morning of exploring, or an exciting Jetboat ride on the Lachine Rapids.
This afternoon you will travel to Quebec City.
Your hotel is the Auberge des Gouverneurs or the Hilton Hotel.
Day 6
Quebec City
A full day of guided sightseeing is planned.
The only walled city left in North America is a charming combination of fine homes and monumental squares.
Day 7
Quebec City–Ottawa
Motor across the Ontario border to Ottawa, Canada's striking capital.
Stop for lunch at the Sucrerie de la Montagne en route, before spending the rest of the day at leisure in this city of wide avenues and tree-lined squares.
Spend the night at the Delta Ottawa.
Day 8
Ottawa
Today you will take a morning guided tour through the downtown area, along the scenic Rideau Canal and by the gothic parliament buildings.
Spend the afternoon exploring the many shops and galleries, or take a leisurely boat cruise.
Overnight at the Delta Ottawa.
Day 9
Ottawa–Orilla
Head north into stunning wilderness country, a region of sparkling lakes, rushing streams and dense forests.
The impressive wildlife reserve of the Algonquin Provincial Park is a stunning array of native animals in the wild.
On to the Muskoka resort region for an overnight stay at the Highwayman Inn.
Day 10
Orilla–Niagara Falls
Visit Midland's Sainte Marie among the Hurons, a large reconstruction of the first European settlement here.
Continue south through orchards and vineyards to the thundering Niagara Falls.
Spend the evening exploring the honeymoon capital of the world, staying overnight at Your Host Motor Inn.
Day 11
Niagara Falls–Toronto
A thrilling boat ride to the very base of the falls is followed by a drive along the scenic Niagara Parkway to the historic village of Niagara-on-the-Lake.
Browse through the old world shops and boutiques, then drive back to Toronto for an end of tour dinner.
Overnight at the Delta Chelsea Inn.
Day 12
Toronto–London
Make your own way to Toronto Airport for your flight to London.
Departures on Mondays: 21 May, 4 and 18 June, 2, 16 and 30 Jul, 13 and 27 August, 10 and 24 September.
ROCKIES TRAIL
A 10 night tour by coach
Day 1
London–Calgary
Depart London for Calgary and make your own way to the Delta Bow Valley Inn, where you will be contacted our tour representative.
Day 2
Calgary–Banff
A morning tour of Calgary begins the day.
The afternoon gives a first real taste of the majestic Canadian Rocky Mountains.
Stay in Banff at the Travellers Inn.
Day 3
Banff National Park
Tour the Banff region, seeing Canada's premier national park, and lovely Lake Louise.
The afternoon is at leisure to enjoy the marvellous scenery.
Day 4
Banff–Jasper
Travel north on the Glaciers Highway and before reaching Jasper, stop for an exciting snowmobile ride on the Columbia Icefields.
Spend the night at the Chateau Jasper.
Day 5
Jasper–Kamloops
Today, journey along the famous Yellowhead Highway, via Mount Robson and Wells Gray Park, where you will stop for lunch.
Spend the night at the Dome Motor Inn in Kamloops.
Day 6
Kamloops–Whistler Resort
Continue west to Lillooet, where a breath-taking train ride through stunning mountainland delivers you to the world-renowned Whistler Resort.
Overnight at Nancy Greene's Olympic Lodge.
Day 7
Whistler Resort–Victoria
Board the ferry bound for Vancouver Island.
After a short cruise, continue by coach to Victoria, passing logging towns and fishing villages en route.
Overnight at the Coast Chateau Victoria.
Day 8
Victoria–Vancouver
Following a visit to the Butchart Gardens with its beautiful floral displays, return to Vancouver.
The trip includes a pleasant cruise through the Gulf Island resort region.
Rest of the day at leisure.
Spend the night at the Ming Court Hotel.
Day 9
Vancouver
Enjoy a tour of this great city.
The afternoon is yours for further exploring, until a farewell dinner party during the evening.
Spend 3 nights at the Ming Court Hotel.
Days 10–11
Vancouver
At leisure to explore the many sights, including the Grouse Mountain, English Bay, Chinatown and lovely Stanley Park.
Day 12
Vancouver–London
Make your own way to Vancouver Airport for your return flight to London.
Departures on Fridays: 1, 15, 21 June, 13 and 27 July, 10 and 24 August, 7 and 21 September.
CANADIAN DISCOVERY TOUR
21 night tour
To really see Canada in depth, combine both of our tours into one great Canadian Discovery, a comprehensive tour of this vast country and its fascinating sights.
From the lively, modern city of Toronto to the undeniable French flavour of Montreal or Quebec through to the rugged grandeur of Banff or Niagara Falls, discover the soul of this friendly country.
Please ask Reservations for details.
Departures on Mondays: 21 May, 4 and 18 June, 2, 16 and 30 July, 13 and 27 August, 10 and 24 September.
Emerald Lake
Canadian Mountie, Banff
Chateau Lake Louise
Niagara Falls
Castle Mountain, Alberta
ALASKA
Imagine a country overrun with brilliantly-coloured flowers every spring, a national park abounding with wildlife, including bears, deer, caribou and an abundance of birdlife.
Imagine long, warm, sunny days to enjoy stunning scenery, or to recapture the spirit of Gold Rush days.
Picture sailing in style on serene waters, wondering at awesome glaciers and spotting the seals, whales and porpoises.
The largest state in the USA is also the most forgotten; Alaska has long nurtured a reputation of massive icy plateaux and frozen lakes, but on closer inspection a surprising setting of national parks, waterfalls, fjords, forests and glaciers emerges, vying for the attention of the eye in one great sweeping vista of icy magnificence.
This land of dramatic contrast, vastness and grandeur offers spectacular scenery, story-book adventure and a wealth of history to the traveller.
This tour offers you the opportunity to see Alaska in style, aboard the magnificent cruise ship MS Nieux Amsterdam, comfortable motor coach and luxury rail.
ALASKAN ADVENTURE CRUISE
Day 1
London–Seattle–Anchorage
Fly from London to Seattle and board a connecting flight to Anchorage.
Day 2
Anchorage–Portage Glacier
Transfer to the cruise ship for a leisurely journey to the celebrated Portage Glacier amid stunning mountain scenery.
Day 3
Anchorage–Denali
Travel by luxury train to the scenic Denali, where the afternoon is yours to explore the nature trails, take photos or see a dogsled display.
Day 4
Denali–Fairbanks
From a private carriage aboard the McKinley Explorer, travel to Denali National Park for a tour deep into the wilderness.
Day 5
Fairbanks
Spend the day on a tranquil cruise from Fairbanks aboard the classic sternwheeler ‘Discovery’.
Day 6
Fairbanks–Beaver Creek
Drive to Beaver Creek, looking out on the way for moose and eagles along the roadside.
Day 7
Beaver Creek–Whitehouse
Discover the Yukon with a visit to the fascinating old mining town of Whitehouse which flourished in the '90s during the Gold Rush.
Day 8
Whitehouse–Skagway
Explore the famous Gold Rush town of Skagway, another of the Yukon's mining centres.
Recapture the spirit of the great '90s aboard the narrow gauge, White Pass and Yukon Railroad to the summit of White Pass.
Day 9
Skagway–Juneau
After cruising the peaceful Lynn Canal to Juneau, visit the world's most photographed glacier, the magnificent Juneau Ice Cap.
Day 10
Juneau
Take a morning tour of Juneau, a town with a backdrop of forested mountains, whose impressive buildings include the Governor's Mansion and Capitol.
Day 11
Cruising Glacier Bay
Spend a memorable day on beautiful Glacier Bay, where gleaming white icebergs dot the waters.
This park includes 16 tidewater glaciers, lofty fjords and much wildlife.
Day 12
Sitka
The headquarters for Russia's fur trade in the 1800s was once called the Paris of the Pacific because of its grace and charm.
St. Michael's Cathedral is the focal point of the city.
Day 13
Cruising the Inside Passage.
Moving slowly through the picture-postcard scenery of the Inside Passage is the perfect opportunity to relax and spot eagles, whales and porpoises.
Day 14
Vancouver
Disembark your luxury cruise ship for a free day in Vancouver, a modern and impressive city on an island off the coast of Canada.
Overnight at the Hyatt Regency.
Day 15
Vancouver–London
Spend the morning at leisure in Vancouver until your evening departure for London.
Departures on Fridays: 18 and 25 May, 1, 8, 15, 22 and 29 June, 6, 13, 20 and 27 July, 3, 10, 17, 24 and 31 August, 7 September.
Cruising through Alaska's stunning scenery