

8F TROUBLE
S.V.R. loco ‘framed’
By JAKE RAYMOND
Although initial reports last week indicated that the Severn Valley 8F had completed its north-bound leg of the Welsh Marches Express from Hereford to Crewe satisfactorily, the run was not entirely free from mechanical problems.
Consequently the locomotive was returned to Bridgnorth and was not able to fulfil its Red Rose run on Monday September 23rd, which would have taken the locomotive from Crewe to Carnforth where it was to have had two south-bound outings on Cumbrian Mountain Expresses of October 26th and November 16th.
SVR General Manager Michael Draper has confirmed that the problem was that the wheels of the 8F were coming into intermittent contact with the frames.
This was not envisaged as being too difficult a fault to put right, and the locomotive was expected to be back in service very shortly.
On the question of whether the locomotive would be available to complete the double 8F' Cumbrian Mountain Express at the end of October, Mr Draper advised that the locomotive would be available if BR required it to complete this roster.
This comment was later confirmed by Flying Scotsman Services and it is to be hoped that the long awaited 8F event will be sanctioned.
The indisposition of the 8F led to some speculation by passengers on the Cambrian Limited, last Sunday, that the Standard 4 No 75069 would  fulfil the Red Rose roster in place of No 8233.
We can reveal that the reason for the rumour was that the Severn Valley 2–6–0 was scheduled to move to Crewe on Monday.
The reason for this move was not, of course, to haul the Red Rose positioning train, but to be put in place to pull a private charter train.
Details of this run are not yet available but will follow as soon as these are available.
Stanier spellbinder
The Severn Valley 8F is pictured approaching Dorrington with the return leg of the Welsh Marches Express on Sunday, September 22nd.
When friends become enemies
During the course of my working week I must see quite a number of society magazines.
They vary in standard enormously but the one thing that shines through them is the enthusiasm of people for their railways.
On quite a number of occasions that enthusiasm spills over and then another emotion comes to the surface.
That is when something goes wrong.
The rest of the steam movement watches in amazement as societies and lawyers meet head on in disputes over everything from liveries to the way the railways accounts are handled.
When friends fall out the mess can be considerable and it can take some time for the wounds to heal.
But heal they do as we have seen from those lines who have been to the brink demonstrate.
The whole point is that if power falls into the wrong hands it usually hurts the railway cause.
And that in turn does damage to the whole railway movement as the publicity hits both local, regional and, occasionally, national press.
Societies should always be aware when they are launched that life is not always sweetness and  light when the pressure is on and constitutions should be framed so that disputes do arrive the framework for settlement already exists.
Like the modern marriage the facility exists for a contract to be formed and so too steam can learn from that lesson.
Make no mistake running a railway is big business.
And commercial life these days ain't easy as we can vouch.
Museum sales
The Birmingham Railway Museum announces a sale by tender of approximately 40 surplus items.
These include two display locomotives, GWR Collett Brake Mess Coach, LNWR TPO, several interesting wagons and items of ‘railway furniture’ including a water column and weighbridge.
Tender forms are available from October 30, 1991 from the Museum address on receipt of a sae and remittance for £5 to defray expenses.
No correspondence or enquiries can be dealt with other than in accordance with the tender conditions.
Last Sunday I popped in to see Peter Sam on the Talyllyn Railway, writes JAKE RAYMOND.
He asked me if I would be kind enough to remind all parents that his is returning to the Skarloey Railway at the end of October.
The railway have promised to give him a special party during the weekend of October 26 and 27 and he looks forward to seeing as many of this young friends as possible at that event.
Please telephone 0654 710472 for full details.
Number 3 will take part in a once only event on November 3rd, when, bearing Corris livery and hauling the beautifully restored Corris coach and other vehicles it will be possible to see, ride behind and photograph a vintage Corris Train.
Peter Sam above leaves Dolgoch Station on the Talyllyn Railway on Sunday, September 29th.
Helping hands
Following a long and hard season for its own loco's Sydney and No. 24 the Broadland Line will be giving them a well earned rest for the next couple of weeks.
This has only been possible with the help of Bressingham Steam Museum and Cumbria's Ravenglass and Eskdale Railway.
From Monday September 16 the railway will have had two steam loco's, one from each of these lines in regular use but the stay ends after this weekend's gala.
Both Mannertreu from Bressingham and River Irt from Ravenglass and Eskdale Railway are superbly powerful mainline narrow gauge engines, and perfectly capable of dealing with the steep inclines and heavy loads the Broadland Line has to cope with.
Early arrivals for Bure Valley Steam Gala Mannertreu and River Irt alongside the Bure Valley's S.R. & R.L. No. 24 and Tracy-Jo.
Brechin station deal
A major restoration programme sponsored by Scottish Enterprise Tayside in partnership with Angus District Council will be the first step in transforming the semi-derelict Brechin railway station into a tourist attraction for Tayside.
The works, which have just started, will cost £191,000 and involve making the early-Victorian listed building wind and water tight and restoring part of it for use by the Brechin Railway Preservation Society.
SET is carrying out the contract and spending £136,000, supported by £55,000 from Angus District Council.
The first phase of the restoration works will allow BRPS and its charitable operating company, Caledonian Railway (Brechin) Ltd, to offer visitors a much better experience within the historic buildings, which are leased from ADC.
A booking office, entrance hall, waiting-room, manager's office, shop and toilets will be provided.
Constructed in 1847/48, Brechin was originally the terminus of a branch line which joined the main Aberdeen to Glasgow railway at Bridge of Dun.
The soft red/brown sandstone buildings at Brechin form the last Caledonian branch line terminus.
Passenger services ceased in the early 1950s and freight services in 1981.
Fortunately the BRPS had been formed in 1979 with the object of preserving the branch line and station as a tourist attraction.
The BRPS expects to be awarded a light railway order in the very near future, which will allow it to run trains from Brechin to Bridge of Dun.
Discussions are already under way with the National Trust for Scotland regarding a suitable themed transport link between Bridge of Dun station and the recently re-opened House of Dun, which would allow the BRPS and NTS to offer a joint visitor experience.
Report courtesy Dundee Courier and Advertiser.
LEIGHTON BUZZARD IN FOCUS
By Graham Stroud
ELIDIR (right) Hunslete from Llanberis Lake Railway, visiting Leighton Buzzard Railway Steam-up ‘91.
Behind is ‘protected’ Motor Rail loco 2278 on loan from National Railway Museum.
Wren (left) Peter Pan alongside 7hp Lister Thorin Oakenshield and skips at Page's Park Station.
Cornish surprise
AUGUST BANK Holiday saw the Gloucester Warwickshire Railway springing a surprise on visitors by staging a re-enactment of the ‘Cornishman’ service along part of the Honeybourne line between Toddington and Gretton.
By WAYNE FINCH
G.W.R. Castle No 5080 ‘Defiant’ adorned with headboard and reporting numbers (which were kindly loaned by Mr. E. Roberts) rekindled memories of the last down ‘Cornishman’which ran on September 7 1962 behind Castle No 7001 ‘Sir James Milne’.
At the same time the G.W.R. welcomed serving South African Railways driver Mr. John Gilberthorpe, who shared ‘Defiants’ footplate with regular driver Colin Jacks and fireman Nigel Barton-Hawkins.
John has clocked up over 20 years service on most S.A.R.
locomotive classes, including Garratts, and at present is allocated to a 25 N.C. 4–8–4 No 3488 ‘Enchantress’, together with his regular fireman Richard Niven.
Both John and Richard are British exiles.
As steam declines in South Africa they find themselves transferred around various depots and are currently working out of Kimberley.
John's trip on ‘Defiant’ was his first ever on a Castle and Collin Jacks reports he was very impressed not only with the locomotive but also with the surrounding Cotswold countryside.
He took a turn at firing and soon mastered the Castle's long firebox which is somewhat different to the wide fireboxes he is used  to .
With regards to John's regular locomotive, the nameplates are of special interest.
These were purchased by John and Richard at their own expense and are of ‘Britannia’ style being manufactured in Chippenham, Wilts by Skillcraft.
At the end of each working the nameplates, which weigh 55 lbs each, are removed for safe keeping.
John was impressed with the state of affairs at Toddington but  even more impressed with the enthusiasm of the volunteers who like their counterparts on other preserved lines keep the wheels turning.
Defiant with the ‘Cornishman’ headboard
Bluebell's Southern tribute
A special celebration is to be held at the Bluebell Railway on Sunday, to commemorate the achievements of both the former Southern Region, and the Southern Railway.
This will be part of a special promotion, supported by publishers, Ian Allen Ltd, in which the five top, privately preserved railways in Southern England, have joined together to help promote each other.
On Sunday, the day will start with the 10.25am departure of the train, from Sheffield Park Station, to Horsted Keynes.
The Golden Arrow dining train will be making several t rips up the line, during the day.
Merchant Navy class locomotive Port Line is schedule to be hauling this train.
Among the other locomotives that will be in steam, on this special Sunday, will be the vintage ‘H’ class, South Eastern and Chatham Railway, No 263, recently returned to service after lengthy repairs.
Also in steam, will be the Southern Railway engine, No 541 and the regular Bluebell favourite ‘Stepney’ that will be in the Northern Extension Shuttle, at Horsted Keynes.
West Lancs linked
THE WEST Lancashire Light Railway, the passenger-carrying narrow gauge line at Hesketh Bank between Southport and Preston, moves into the twentieth century with the introduction of a telephone after a period of twenty-four years.
The railway was started in 1967 by a group of school boys from King George V in Southport.
All are still involved.
The society has five steam locomotives, one from a Welsh slate quarry, one from a Spanish coal mine, one from the trenches of the first world war.
All date from the turn and early part of this century, two undergoing restoration, one being repaired and an interesting and varied collection of petrol and diesel locomotives, coaches and wagons.
The introduction of a telephone will give the railway more opportunities to advise visitors of steam dates (every Sunday until the end of October) and forthcoming special events like the Santa Special trains running this year on December 8th, 15th and 22nd from 12 until 5pm.
The railway's number is 0772 815881.
BRIGHTON OPEN DAY WITH GEOFF CARROLL
TOP: Crowds mill around four of the star steam attractions at the Lovers Walk, Brighton, Open Day on September 22.
This was one of the events at the birthday week-end to mark the 150th anniversary of the completion of the London to Brighton line on September 21, 1841.
Left to right are: Brighton-built (1954) 2–6–4T 80080; SR 4–6–0 No. 777 Sir Lamile; Standard Pacific 70000 Britannia and Brighton-built (1946) West Country Pacific No. 340127 Taw Valley.
BELOW: Before joining the Lovers Walk display two Brighton-built LB & SCR ochre-liveried locos, 0–6–0T No. 55 Stepney C18755, from the Bluebell, and 0–4–2 No. 214 Gladstone (1882), from the National Railway Museum, were re-united and shown at Brighton station.
CENTRE: Gladstone with its Royal Train coat of arms of the kind it might have carried on London to Epsom Derby Day trains.
Central go South
Boscastle on the verge
TO CO-INCIDE with the AGM of the Bulleid Society, the GCR is to stage a Southern Weekend on October 12–13th.
Both operational SR locomotives, 35005 and 30926 will be in steam both days and, hopefully, 34029 ‘Broadcastle’ which is nearing the end of its lengthy restoration will be on display outside the shed.
Also available for inspection will be the running chassis of 341001 ‘Hartland’ which is also being restored on the GCR.
It is hoped that ‘Boscastle’ will be in service early in 1992 after a major effort by the owning syndicate who have engaged the services of Bulleid Pacific maestro Phil Preston, who was involved with similar work on 35005.
November 5th will as usual be celebrated at Quorn with a huge bonfire and firework display with train services from both Loughborough and, for the first time, Leicester.
The Loughborough departure will be by DMU at 1925 and Leicester steam-hauled at 1930.
The G.C.R.'s popular night steam event will see some changes this year.
There will be the usual floodlit scenes at Loughborough with locos posed in the yard and on the front of the passenger train which will, subject to availability, be hauled by GCR No 506 ‘Butler-Henderson’ now in its final six months of service before the need for major overhaul.
A ‘local passenger’ train (not for public use) will run into the other platform hauled by GWR No 7760.
The 1930 ‘Night Mail’ departure from Loughborough will stop at Quorn for passengers to detrain and cross the line before a high speed run-past and mail drop takes place.
The next stop at Rothley will allow plenty of time for photographs at the restored gas-lit station where another runpast will take place while refreshments are served.
The parcel office and booking office will be available for photography aided by staff in period dress.
The final part of the journey the griddle car will provide hot meals for passengers during the non-stop return to Loughborough at around 2200hrs.
It will then be possible to see the loco disposal taking place at the shed.
A bar will also be carried on the train.
It is also hoped that No 506 will be in use during the day as one of the rostered locos.
Great Central stress that anyone wishing to use the facilities MUST be in possession of a ticket for the journey to Leicester and day rovers, platform tickets and lineside permits will not be valid after 6 p.m.
The normal fare of £5 (child £2.50) will apply with no surcharge for the additional facilities.
The Railway report that bookings are already heavy for the Santa Specials which start on November 30.
An hourly service from 10.00 will operate and there will be accommodation for non-Santa passengers.
During Christmas week the Santa Specials will operate on Monday 23rd and Tuesday 24th (Christmas Eve) up until 1400.
From Boxing Day normal services will operate daily until January 1st.
Locos in use will be from the pool including 35005, 30926, 506, 5593, 6990, 7760, and possibly 5224.
Tasteful headboards will be carried.
From January 4th the new G.C.R. 1992 timetable will apply featuring hourly departures and two-train operation on busy days including every Sunday throughout the year and Saturdays from April to October inclusive.
Additionally the railway will run daily from May to September inclusive with a two-hourly service on weekdays.
A griddle car service will be available on weekdays and Saturdays during the period of daily running.
Canadian Pacific in operation
The Annual Gala Weekend at the Museum Chappel & Wakes Colne stations is looking set to provide entertainment on a grand scale on October 5th and 6th.
On Saturday there will be a Photographer's Evening with suitably arranged exhibits and locos in steam to provide some atmosphere of the appropriate kind.
Light refreshments will include Real Ale following the successful application for an on-licence, and burgers cooked on Gladstone Mk II.
On Sunday the railway enthusiasts move in.
There will be four engines in operation with two trains to push, pull, top and tail, and double-head.
This should provide some rarely-seen movements and will be a fitting climax to another season of Chappel Steam Open Days.
Santa in December will herald the next steam events and provide an introduction to the Steam on the Branch Specials.
These will run on December 22nd and 29th the Sundays before and after Christmas.
Five trips on each day with the Class N7/4 0–6–2 Tank number 69621 running between Marks Tey and Gt.
Cornard 22 miles of steam with the bank at Bures to be climbed for good measure.
The first train at 0830 on December 22nd will celebrate the return of steam-hauled passenger trains after 32 years and is an addition especially for the enthusiasts.
THE NAME of South Manchester's newest society was borrowed from that of the erstwhile ‘Cheshire Lines Committee’, the CLC a now, sadly, largely defunct railway network which well-served the vicinity in its heyday.
Indeed that Company's long-closed Tiviot Dale Station was within yards of the Society's regular meetings venue.
Formed to fill a long-standing local need, ‘Cheshire Lines’ is the culmination of some years of suggestions and discussions by quite a number of railway enthusiasts in the Stockport area.
It has no affiliation to any preservation society or other national group, being established merely as a focal point for those wishing to, either, exchange information on current steam operation worldwide, or, to indulge in the sheer nostalgia of days bygone.
Membership, renewable annually, is free.
As a first step an indoor events programme has been arranged, to take place on the second Wednesday of each month, in the clubroom at the Queens Hotel in Great Portwood Street, Stockport,(opposite ‘Comet’), adjacent to Junction 13 M63.
Although regular guest speakers are being organised, it is hoped to encourage contributions from within our own membership, be it a whole evening's entertainment or merely a ten-minute talk or slide-presentation.
The  inaugural meeting will take place at 7.30pm on Wednesday October 9th.
With a programme of slides and films taken by local railway photographers.
King and friends
The 6000 Locomotive Association will stage their annual end of season Open Day at the Bulmer Railway Centre at Whitecross Road, Hereford on Sunday between 11.00 and 17.00
They will have three GWR locos on display: King Edward I 6024, City of Truro and Pannier tank 5786.
Tender progress
COTSWOLD Steam Preservation's GWR 2–8–0–7 tender work is progressing.
The frames have received attention while a new tender tank has been ordered from Mercia Fabrications of Dudley, West Midlands.
The Group's other loco GWR 2–8–0 tank 4277 has been repainted as has her syphon companion.
Assistance and shareholders are needed by CSP Ltd.
3442 The Great Marquess stands at Bewdley water tower in between duties at the Severn Valley's Autumn gala.
The loco was rostered to pull a brake van train between Bewdley and Kidderminster at 10.10, 11.35 and 13.05.
Picture: Steve Sandbridge
A Western locomotive on the North Wales Coast Mainline…
BILL REAR reveals it's not new!
BUILDING MORE CASTLES AROUND THE MOUNTAINS
An  in-depth feature on the ceaseless wanderings of Britain's steam locomotives and railwaymen
In Steam Railway News issue No 163, page three, there was a report of the proposed running of Western Region Castle Class, No 5029 on the North Wales main line, an enquiry of any other occasions when top-link Great Western engines ran to Holyhead.
Now, as far as I know, mechanical missionaries from the copper-capped brigade made various sorties on the L.M. main line over the years, but only one expedition by what might be considered a top-link engine is on record having penetrated further than Mold Junction.
I must stress that it was not a first-hand observation, but in fact is third-hand.
However, my source is no less than J.M. Dunn, generally considered impeccable, so I have no reason to doubt its accuracy.
Further, I spoke to the driver concerned, who is still alive, and who confirmed the events and the working.
First, however, a little background history.
There were proposals about the time of Nationalisation, when the Regional Boundaries were being drawn up.
The first suggestion was to transfer lines in Wales en bloc to the Western Region.
Observations and comments on the proposal were requested by the B.R.B. in early 1948 from their various departmental heads and all responsible personnel involved, which included the Llandudno Junction Motive Power District, then coded 7A, which was responsible for the garage depots at Bangor (7B), Holyhead (7C), Rhyl (7D) and its sub-shed at Denbigh.
The L.D.C.
at Bangor was consulted by the Shed Master, J.M. Dunn, and although apathy was normally the order of the day among the footplate crews, it aroused interest, not the least because if the change to the Western Region took place, and if this involved exchanging L.M.S.
engines for G.W.R. ones, the standard for crew comfort was likely to decline, especially for branch line work, of which Bangor was well endowed.
There was some main line work involved as well, but in the main , the branch line workings formed 60% of the regular rostered turns.
The transfer would involve the replacement of the 2–6–2 and 2–6–4 tank engines with their Western Region equivalent.
A couple of days later the answers were supplied over the phone, indicating that this would indeed be the case.
Not only would the branch line locomotives be involved, but also The mainline workings, and it was envisaged that Chester (Western) shed would assume control over a new district and locomotives would carry copper-top chimneys wherever possible.
At this point the alarm bells started ringing in the ears of the Middle Management along the coast, and mutiny was definitely on the cards amongst all grades of staff, not just the footplate men.
The conciliation staff did a bit of homework, and found out how fond Swindown had been over the years  for concealing motion and valve gear between the frames, which did not arouse enthusiasm amongst the more portly fitters, who had plenty of experience of these delights with the collective works of F.W. Webb and other C.M.E.'s designs.
The advent of Stanier, and his successors locomotives designs, with their outside motion and labour saving examples were slowly replacing the older LNW engines along the coast.
any displacement of outside motion jobs by inside motion versions was regarded as a retrograde step and had to be discouraged at all costs.
However, the issue was decided by the Civil Engineers, who conducted clearance tests at very short notice, and found that most station platforms would need the platform edging stones setting back.
The cost of this exercise was considered prohibitive, and the time factor to effect the alterations involved had it been financially acceptable, would have taken a couple of years.
The matter was allowed to subside, much to the relief of most of the employees.
Western Region, however, were still intent on empire building and then raised the matter of a line transfer which affected Bangor, Rhyl and Denbigh sheds directly.
They proposed that the branch lines between Afonwen and Bangor, Corwen to Denbigh and Rhyl, and Denbigh to Mold be transferred from the L.M.R. to the W.R.
Apparently a Western Civil Engineer had determined that a most of the branch line stations concerned, the platform clearances were more generous and in any case, the limited motive power requirements for these lines could be covered by inside cylinder tender engines.
The mutiny departments on the L.M. gave a sigh, and went into action again, pointing out that Bangor was the major interchange point from the branch lines, and the platforms would have to be altered there.
Space was a premium particularly on Summer Saturdays, and the congestion at the shed throat caused by engines coming off, and going on shed was responsible for most of the delays  along the North Wales coast when locomotives changes were necessary, particularly for the Butlins' workings.
(Readers should consult the North Wales Traffic Surveys for 1953, 1954 and 1962 published by the Manchester Locomotive Society for examples of their  territorial gains if possible, and compromised by suggesting that Caernarfon be designated the changeover point, which was certainly a practical solution to which the L.M. boys had no real answer.
In the end, however, the decision was at first deferred, and then quietly abandoned.
The author remembers seeing the internal correspondence on this matter in 1951  when J.M. Dunn showed me the file on the matter.
At that time, I enquired about the reaction at Rhyl and Denbigh, and his reply was there was no strong argument put forward against the transfer.
He speculated that Rhyl platform clearances would be the main stumbling block.
He had not seen the correspondence about the lines through Denbigh, as his men no longer worked over, nor signed the road to Denbigh.
The transfer was mentioned a couple of times in passing, in later years, during conversation, but the papers were never produced at the time.
J.M. Dunn died in May 1969 and, although the author has subsequently acquired many of Mr Dunn's notebooks and private papers over the years, this particular correspondence was not included and has not surfaced as yet.
The popularity of the Festival Land Cruise train in 1951, which ran a circular route from Llandudno to Rhyl, where it reversed, then on to Denbigh, Corwen, Barmough, where a ninety minute break was taken, returning via Harlech, Afonwen , Caernarfon and Bangor to Llandudno, was such that the following year a second train was introduced, following the same route but starting from, and returning to Rhyl.
A commentary was supplied by a courier, over loudspeakers to some coaches, and the trains were entitled ‘North Wales Radio Land Cruises’.
Motive Power was supplied by Rhyl (6K) shed, using Ivatt 2–6–0 locomotives of the 464xx series.
The Western Region, envious of the success of the London Midland Region Radio Land Cruise Trains, introduced their own on 29th June 1£954 which worked in the opposite direction to the L.M. Region turns.
Pwllheli men worked the job throughout, although they had pilotmen from Denbigh, Rhyl and Bangor for most of the journey, unlike the  Rhyl men who learned the road throughout.
The Western Region initially used Collett 0–6–0 locomotives of the 2251 class.
The very first working was by No 3202 which hauled to coaches.
The working was on Tuesdays and Thursdays only, and within a short while the loadings increased until the standard formation was a five coach set.
GWR engines worked the turn for about six weeks.
The following year the work was covered by B.R. standard classes, usually 75xxx Class 4–4–6–0's.
The Corwen-Denbigh-Rhyl line also saw incursions by GWR design locomotives from time to time.
These were usually private charter specials from Dolgellau to Rhyl, and in the main were worked by Collett 0–6–0 tender engines of the 2251 class.
Gwyn Parry of Greasby, however, observed such an excursion when the motive power throughout comprised of a Collett 0–6–0 and Dukedog No 9028, which he photographed departing from the Down passenger loop platform on the return working.
In the winter of 1962, Collett 0–6–0 No 3208 was the Llandudno Junction snow plough engine, and made several sorties along both the main line and the Amlwch branch during that very severe winter.
Norman Kneale of Menai Bridge  photographed it near Llanfair P.G.
In October 1964 he also photographed one of Croes Newydd's 0–6–2T No 6604 on the wheel drop in the shed.
Reverting to the main line working though, there is only one known occasion when a GWR design outside cylinder mixed traffic 4–6–0 engine succeeded in traversing the North Wales coast.
The exact date is not known for certain, but is either July 12th or 19th 1958.
The working was the Relief to the 9.45 am from Bradford Exchange to Llandudno, reporting Number C4468, which was running in two parts.
The normal working was not booked to stop at Chester but the second part, inserted at very short  notice , was scheduled to change locomotives there.
There was a permanent shortage of suitable locomotives and train crews on peak summer Saturdays along the coast, and this extra working added somewhat to the R.S.F.'s problems.
Consequently he was obliged to persuade a driver and his regular fireman to agree to give up their mid day finish to work the extra special.
As a compromise the Running Foreman agreed to have the engine fully prepared and ready.
Traffic was running about 20 minutes late by 10am that day out of Chester on the Down lines, and platform space was at a premium.
There was some congestion along the coast, compounded by the bottlenecks at Connah's Quay, where Down fast and slow lines converged as far as Muspratt's Sidings, and again  at Llandulas.
Traffic was kept on the move, but signalled from block to block with the distant signals almost permanently ‘on’.
The author was also on the coast that day, but working the 9.20 am to Crewe to Holyhead and unaware of the unusual circumstances that followed.
The Chester traincrew concerned were duly relieved about 11.15 am and hitched a lift onto the LM shed from the station.
While the fireman attended to a brew, the driver sought out the R.S.F. in his lair, and enquired the loco number ‘4913’ came the reply.
‘She's all ready.’
So our hero stumped off down the yard and came across 4913.
Somewhat perplexed, he went back to the office.
‘What number did you say?’ he queried.
‘Wassa matter.
You bloody deaf! 4913’ came the reply, which sent the blood pressure up several degrees.
So extracting his fireman they went down the yard and got onto 4913.
‘This bloody thing?’ exclaimed the fireman.
With an assortment of adjectives, the driver confirmed, and his fireman noted a determined glint in his mate's eye.
‘And I've just been back and checked just to be sure,’ his mate added.
Checking everything was in order, lamps were  placed on their correct brackets, the handbreak was unwound, and 4913 ‘Baglan hall’ of 84B shed clocked off shed at 12.20 pm and passed through the centre road to the far end of Chester.
The Bradford train followed on the centre road, and the L.M. guard noted the loco change in his  journal , while station staff pulled the strings and the new brake pressure created.
About 1 pm they got the signals and moved round the curve into Northgate tunnel and headed for Llandudno.
The working was booked to stop at Colwyn Bay, Llandudno Junction and Llandudno, and worked from block to block until Muspratt's Sidings when it took the Down Fast line and having got clear signals, proceeded to try to make up time.
The first inkling that anything  was wrong came when Prestatyn station box rang Chester Control to query the foreign engine running through his platform, but it was out of section before the reply was  received .
Thoroughly alarmed by now, Control pondered what to do, but by the time they phoned Colwyn Bay No 1 box, the train was already standing at the platform, and started to move off.
At Llandudno Junction, Control contacted the Motive Power who sauntered over towards the station, just in time to see Baglan Hall head for Llandudno.
Once there, the loco engine was captive, and was impounded.
It was driven very carefully back to Llandudno Junction shed where it was  stored out of steam for a couple of days until the powers decided what to do.
In the end it was towed back to Chester as an out of  gauge load.
The driver concerned was duly issued with a Form 1, which he refused.
It was not his mistake.
He was given an engine number, which he then questioned, and took what he was given, which was unaware that Bangor's Class 5 No 44913 was standing alongside, and in any case the R.S.F. has clearly stated in the presence of others that the engine number was 4913.
The R.S.F. was equally adamant and for a while, the management held out the driver was responsible was to be reprimanded.
This he refused to accept, and in consequence was given a Form 2, which was the equivalent to a dismissal notice, if the client was found guilty.
The driver never disputed that the engine was a foreigner, but pins his defence, he pointed out that the week previous, he had taken over and ex-LNER B.1 4–6–0 working from Sheffield to Llandudno, and despite that being a foreigner, had been acceptable.
His Union Rep. was up to the occasion and had scoured the notice boards for restrictions on locomotive types without success.
Eventually, the management decided they were on to a loser, and the matter was allowed to sink into history.
At Crewe south, on another occasion, Piccolo Pete Johnson succeeded in taking a Grange as far as  Alsager before he stopped, but that is his story, and not mine.
As far as I know, there are no other examples of ex GWR design main line engines having made it along the North Wales coast, and I for one will follow with interest the happenings of February 29th 1992.
After Nunney Castle goes to the seaside will it be the turn of double-chimneyed Clan Castle pictured at Loughborough by JOHN EAST.
Meanwhile down in the valley — something is stirring
THE CONWY VALLEY Line Blaenau Ffestiniog to Llandudno Junction Scenes from the Past 12: Railways of North Wales By W.G. Rear.
Foxline Publishing £7.95.
There's no doubt that the Conwy Valley line is one of Britain's best known and loved branch lines.
Equally nobody doubts that the Welsh byway sits on some of the country's most spectacular countryside.
But for a such railway treasure there is very little in the way of the written word to appreciate its importance of place of affection in the British steam fraternity.
That was until now.
The gap has been filled by Bill Rear's excellent volume.
Here is an example of all that is good in the British railway enthusiast movement moving into print.
An author obviously dedicated to his art and expert enough to share his knowledge with the world has given us  what should be the standard on the line which will stand the test of time.
Sometimes the album format can be tiresome but in this case the paperback book has been ideally balanced with previously unpublished or rarely seen pictures and an excellent array of maps and other illustrations.
I first recall the line in 1959 when as a young boy scout I was taken to camp at Pont-y-Pant.
We watched as the new Derby Lightweight DMUs with cats whiskers markings on the front gave tourists an unrivalled view of the Conwy and Lledr Valleys while the occasional steam  freights fought their way up to the slate mining centre at Blaenau Ffestiniog.
Bill Rear has captured the passing years on this line perfectly and his publishers are to be congratulated for allowing  him the space in which to present his work.
Books on railways are generally expensive in these inflated days but considering the  amount of work that has gone into this volume and the  specialist nature of the work then £7.95 represents excellent value.
Modellers should make this book compulsory reading.
It has so much detail from which to draw inspiration and enthusiasts  around Britain should find a place on their shelves for it.
Only one small criticism and that is it lacks an index and page numbers which could make reference difficult.
But just thumbing through the pages will always be a delightful task.
SEVERN VALLEY SUMMER
A LINESIDE LOOK AT TOP PRESERVED LINE
Photographers PETER HILL and JOHN FAIRCLOUGH at the Severn Valley Railway's Gala
Far left: crew and station staff exchange information
Above centre: Stanier 2–6–0 No 2968 is prepared for the road.
Above LNER visitor 4472 Flying Scotsman shows her paces
Below left GWR Mogul 2857 in fine fettle
Below a timeless GWR scene with Pannier tank 5764
LETTING OFF STEAM
In defence of Gala Weekend
Sir, I, and I suspect a good number of other readers, was surprised to read some of the comments in your feature on page one of the issue dated 20 September relating to the GCR Gala Weekend of 14/15 September.
Certainly it is true that No 506 failed and did not operate on the Saturday.
Sadly the loco is showing its age, and the GC has always said that this final six months is a matter of gently does it.
You spent some time describing how the linesiders were disappointed but nothing about the sterling work done by the loco department at Loughborough to put matters right and ensure a full days running on the Sunday.
Six words covered that effort by engineers with skills you purport to support in the editorial!
Incidentally, ‘Witherslack Hall’ was the rostered standby loco to cover just such problems as this.
Your comments on the recession hitting all railways including GCR were  pertinent but the GCE ‘in particular’?
At the moment our income is approximately 40 percent that in 1990.
Without the recession it would be higher but we must be thankful for what we can get in these times when other railways are reporting reductions of up to 20 percent.
Certainly, the passenger figures did not reach those of the Winter Gala but circumstances were rather different.
More competition from other local attractions and the lack of a ‘new’ loco for a start.
In fact the figures were almost exactly the same as for the May Steam Gala.
You describe the trains as ambling along branch-line style.
Are you suggesting that we exceed the Light Railway Order speed of 25 mph?
Surely not.
When not carrying passengers the limit does not apply and those witnessing the mail drops will testify to this.
Incidentally the Sunday evening TPO was hauled by Butler-Henderson.
Are you suggesting that non-stop trains, tender first running, and double track are the major concerns of our customers?
I would doubt your sampling technique.
Value for money, clean trains, and a nostalgic experience are surely more important to the travelling family who form the major part of our business, and most other preserved railways for that matter.
On the positive side some of your comments did reflect my own findings.
The intensive service with large locos and the smooth operation were certainly appreciated.
The atmosphere was one of people enjoying themselves in their own way and allowing everyone else to do so too.
The sad exception being a few of those ‘dozens’ of linesiders you refer to.
Perhaps their disappointment was partly expressed in lack of lineside permits, high viz jackets, and abusive language to officers and volunteers of the railway.
Perhaps their disappointment will divert them elsewhere in future.
Make your criticisms by all means but I hope that SRN is not joining the worst of our tabloid press where facts are never allowed to get in the way of a good story.
Finally may I thank all those who supported the event which saw five main line steam locomotives operating over a preserved main line and hope that they found their visit enjoyable.
I can assure them of even more in the future.
Memories of Green Arrow
Sir, I was sorry to read in issue 163 of Steam Railway News, that the National Railway Museum's, V2 4771 Green Arrow, has made its last ever main line run.
I hope that 4771 Green Arrow is allowed to go to the Great Central at Loughborough, because at the end of August 1992, it is 30 years that 4771 has been in preservation, and one of her last runs with British Railway's, was on the Great Central.
On my first week as a passed out Goods Guard in August 1962, I had to work an Annesley Sidings, G.C., to Sheffield Rotherham, freight train.
Just a few miles North of Annesley the engine failed on the Tibshelf bank, so I had to go for assistance.
Green Arrow, in a very clean condition, was the banking engine, and even though she had some dozen trucks, had no trouble pushing my stricken train up the Tibshelf bank, proving her great power.
I will certainly visit Loughborough to see 4771, as Ii have not seen her since that day in August 1962.
Call for courtesy
Sir, I refer to a theme mentioned by P. Todd (letters S.R.N.
Nr. 162) and by others in your pages and elsewhere, namely cash and volunteers.
Following a visit to Ingrow on August 11th this year and reading of reduced membership and escalating costs at the Bahamas Locomotive Society, I wrote the following day, as an ordinary member of the public, to their Secretary with the ‘bare bones’ of a suggestion for raising funds.
Now he (the Secretary) may have considered it to be more of a ‘bone headed’ idea, but I wouldn't know because to date (18.09.91) I have not had the benefit of an acknowledgement.
If societies wish to attract more members and cash, they may be well advised to treat the general public with a little more courtesy, even those who are only ‘armchair’ enthusiasts.
Armchair detective
Sir, what a wonderful subject for the armchair detective is that of British railway history!
With reference to the letter from Alec C. Mayor, SRN issue 163, regarding the shed code 11C, I offer these comments: In the Ian Allan ABC of LMS locomotives for April 1946, the shed codes agree with Mr. Mayor's observation.
However, in the ABC of British Railways locomotives for August 19456, the series is shown thus: 11A Carnforth, 11B Barrow/Coniston, 11C Oxenholme, 11D Tebay, and 11E Lancaster.
If these are correct, it is quite possible for 42313 to have carried a shed code 11c after nationalisation, but impossible under LMS ownership.
Incidentally, the LMS code for Lancaster is shown as 20H, a code which does not appear in the BR list!
Cornish queries
Sir, may I suggest, in reply to W Roger Jones query on TRE POL PEN, that he studies a detailed map of the Duchy of Cornwall.
He will be astounded by the place names beginning with the three letters of each prefix.
Many years ago at Cadeby, the outpost of all that is Great Western, it was suggested that the locomotive naming group at Swindon works would have named the 4–4–0 locomotive ‘Duchy of Cornwall’, but with tongue in cheek decided on TRE POL PEN instead, as something of a compliment to that delightful district of the West Country.
LETTING OFF STEAM is the ideal place for you, the SRN readers, to have your say about steam.
Please write to: The Editor, Steam Railway News, Martians Mill, Martland Mill Lane, Wigan, Lancs, WN5 0LX.
All letters are subject to editing and opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect that of the editor or Lancashire Publications Ltd.
465152 King's Dragon Guardsman heads a down relief up the bank between Wigan North Western and Standish Junction.
The date was Good Friday, April 1958.
The appearance of the locomotive was a surprise as it had recently been transferred to Kentish Town to work Midland Express trains out of St. Pancras.
There can't be many pictures of ‘North of Crewe expresses’ pulled by locomotives with a 14B shedplate!
Eyes front for a feast of steam!
Images: A man and a camera's view of steam
THE SEPTEMBER sun shone brightly on the uniformed gathering.
As the appointed time approached, the company which had assembled under the clear blue sky had risen to several hundred strong, and was now deployed in five neat rows on the warm tarmac.
Throughout the ranks, brightly polished footwear glistened nervously in the early morning light, and backpacks were held in restraint by expectant hands.
All eyes were to the front, and ears alerted to imminent commands.
Anyone reading this today could well assume that they were being given a description of a military event, but the date was in fact 1950 and I was about to start my secondary education.
Scholars, old and new, stood in the schoolyard that bright autumnal morning.
The silence was total.
In the far-off fifties, mute obedience seemed to come readily to schoolchildren, in marked contrast to the sullen disobedience which is seen today.
Suddenly, the stillness was punctured by the characteristic bark of a Stanier 8F working hard against a severe gradient.
The noise intensified as the locomotive erupted between two large buildings, set some distance apart, beyond the tree-lined road which ran past the school.
Freshly scrubbed necks turned to follow the pounding locomotive as it fought to lift a heavy freight up the bank some 500 yards over to our left.
I took in the spectacle with great personal satisfaction…
I had in prospect six or seven years daily observation of West Coast Main Line workings.
The Grammar School at Wigan was almost  equidistant between London and Glasgow, and it naturally followed that the bulk of the passenger traffic passed in the middle of the day.
This is not to say that the mornings and evenings were devoid of expresses, or indeed interest.
Indeed, in retrospect, the thought of Stanier and Fowler 2–6–4T's and Black Fives on local trains, and Super D's, Stanier 8F's, and Austerities trundling along with freight parcels trains of considerable variety is positively mouth watering.
However, I had seen such sights before, in my days at primary school, and despite the use of Patriots, Jubilees and even Royal Scots on the more prestigious sets of wagons, it was the early afternoon express traffic which was the focal point of my attention.
For this reason, I was very pleased when the timetable allocated science lessons after the lunch break, as the laboratories, and the adjacent lecture theatre afforded the best possible view of the parade.
In the early fifties, the show started, prompt — as they say — at 1.35pm, with the appearance of the 11.15am Birmingham- Glasgow train.
Our afternoon lessons began at a quarter-to-two, and if the express did not run on time, I ran the risk of being late for roll call.
Not for the first — or last—time in my life, I wished that my name began with a W and not a B!
The working was mandatory viewing, for it often provided a Princess Royal Pacific.
The appearance of these locomotives, north of Warrington, was not as frequent as you might think from a study of published photographs of the period.
Daytime sightings, prior to the late afternoon Mid-Day Scot were rare, and my notebooks indicate that it took four years of assiduous observation before I had ‘spotted’ 12 of the 13 locomotives built.
I never did see 46202, either in Turbomotive, or in rebuilt ‘normal’ guise, as, prior to its untimely demise at Harrow in 11952, it was used exclusively on Liverpool Lime Street to Euston services.
At that time, the train engine was changed at Crewe, and although a Princess Coronation was the most commonly provided motive power, one day in three would produce a Princess Royal or Royal Scot.
Several months into my secondary education, this working provided what was for me the greatest locospotting thrill of the decade.
The train appeared, a full five minutes early, going very strongly, behind an LNER A1 Pacific, resplendent, if memory serves me right, in blue livery.
Viewing of this train — for those people whose names did not begin with a W — was from the quadrangle, and the startled crowd of spotters wondered what on earth had happened.
At 500 yards distance it was just possible that we could have been mistaken.
Very few of us had actually seen an A1, except in the pages of our tan Allen ABC's.
There were still a number of examples of parallel boilered Scots in service at that time, and someone suggested that it was one of these engines fitted with experimental types of chimney and smoke deflectors.
Another suggestion was that an entire class of LMS express locomotives had been withdrawn for some reason.
We waited expectantly for the arrival of the spotters who usually provided the information on the train engine.
To our consternation no one had been posted at the railway overbridge, some 300 yards down the road where the locomotive's details could be taken.
Consternation reigned.
Next day, the 18th September 1951,
(Turn to page 11).
(from page  10 ).
the entire locospotting fraternity gathered — amidst high excitement — at the bridge.
We were not to be disappointed.
Cheers greeted unfamiliar shape thundered past.
Thursday produced 60161 Auld Reekie, and next day it was North British again.
Never had so many children developed weak bladders in so short a period.
Teachers were assembled with requests to leave the rooms where the line could not be seen, to see what other sightings could be made.
Strangely none were reported.
I couldn't wait to spend the weekend at the lineside to see what other surprises were in store.
North British duly obliged with the Birmingham-Glasgow on the Saturday, but dawn till dusk vigils did not produce the procession of A1's, A2's, A3's and A4's I had been hoping to see.
Shortage
The railway grapevine was not the sophisticated piece of equipment we know today, and it was several years before I discovered the reason for these ‘apparitions’.
Evidently an ex-LNER man was drafted into the Motive Power Department at Glasgow and his answer to a Pacific shortage at Polmadie was to arrange for the transfer of the engines we had noted, plus 60159 Bonnie Dundee, which appeared shortly after the sightings reported above.
Sadly the ‘experiment’ only lasted for two short, but exciting, months.
Now, 40 years on there is the prospect that I will once more see an A1 thundering up an incline.
Preservation is about to pull its biggest rabbit out of an amazingly copious hat.
The building of an A1 locomotive, from scratch, is fast becoming a reality.
A sum in the region of a half a million pounds has already been raised or pledged.
It is now a certainty that 60163 Tornado will see service in four or five years time.
In fact the timetable has already commenced, albeit with tender first working.
If you can offer parts, pledges, donations or covenants, please write to Mrs. C. Wilson, The A1 Locomotive Project 1990, 24 Eleanor Place, Stockton-on-Tees, Cleveland.
There will also be Autumn Roadshows to look forward to for those of you who are interested in this project.
Details will appear in SRN in advance of the next meetings.
Midland Railway Centre News
BLACK Five No. 44932, originally programmed to work the Fort William-Mallaig service until November, but was returned prematurely to the Midland Railway Centre for repairs.
These have now been carried out and this fine locomotive is back in service on the Centre's line.
Black Five No. 45491 has arrived from Fleetwood, Standard Class 4 Tank No. 80080 has temporarily departed from Butterley Park to Folkestone where she worked as banking engine on the Harbour Branch there as part of the  centenary celebrations of the line.
She then went to Cardiff to work several steam specials in the South Wales Valleys, after which she is due to return to her home at the Centre.
The latest new locomotive arrival is English Electric No. 20/277 on which restoration work began immediately.
It is reported as being in excellent condition.
Class 24 ‘Experiment’ has been returned to working order and repainted in her red and blue Research Department livery.
Deltic ‘Tulyar’ and the Class 45 have been away from the Centre attending Laira Open Day, whilst Class 44 ‘Great Gable’and Class 24 ‘Experiment’attended the Cambridge Open Day.
All are now back at Butterley Park.
Most of these engines will be in operation during the next Diesel Weekend on 12th/13th October.
Rolling Stock
Restoration of the former LD & ECR six-wheel, five-compartment coach of 1986 is nearly complete and it will very shortly be taking its place in the Museum Bay of the Matthew Kirtley Building with the Midland ‘Shotton’ coach and the Royal Saloon, both already resident there.
As with the ‘Shotton’, the excellence of the vehicles restoration has to be seen to be fully appreciated.
13 wooden bodied four-wheel wagons, some of them of Midland Railway origin, have been purchased by Trust member Peter Stanley.
Some will be restored to running the exhibition condition, the remaining vehicles being used for component parts.
Mark I Brake Second Open coach No. 9300 which arrived at Butterley as a derelict hulk, has been restored to pristine condition by husband and wife team Chris and Ann Deeth, and it has now entered service.
Events
A Vintage Weekend which featured a goods train and a vintage passenger train comprising of MR ‘Shotton’ coach, the nearly completed LD & ECR and the LMS Horse Box was a successful event which is to be repeated next year.
Regal Western Ex-GWR
4–6–0 King Edward prepares for the Bulmer Railway Centre Gala Day this weekend.
A black day for G.C. veteran Butler Henderson
It has been rumoured that the Great Central 4–4–0 No 506 butler Henderson will be turned out in black livery at some time before its final planned outings during the Spring Gala at the end of February 1992.
A change of identity was also mooted in view of the fact that in BR livery the numbers and names were merely painted on these locomotives.
A spokesman for the railway confirmed that there was a suggestion on the table to do this.
It had come from the London Group of members, but the Operations Department have not yet come to a decision on this.
Indeed, as the locomotive will have to be restored to its current green livery before being returned to the National Railway Museum the prospects for a change are not high.
Mind you, if someone would like to sponsor this work it might be that the Great Central Railway would be happy to give the locomotive a different identity for a short period.
One suggestion which has appeared in print was that the clone should bear the name of one of the Directors which Sir Nigel Gresley ordered for the North British Railway.
It cannot be denied that it would be splendid to see Luckie Mucklebackit, Edie Ochiltree, Wizard of the Moor or any other member of the Class in action once more, but the purists might object to a D11/1 being portrayed as a D11/2.
Because of NBR loading gauge restrictions, the ‘Scottish-Directors’ had cut down chimneys, domes and cab.
Perhaps a more topical Prince of Wales would be a more suitable choice?
It is not possible for the Railway to give advance notice of the running of the Director in view of the locomotive's age and condition.
As was seen at the recent September Gala the old gentleman is feeling his age and his appearance on the Sunday was only possible after herculean efforts on the part of the staff who had to work on a hot locomotive, in the most trying conditions, to ensure an appearance at the Gala Weekend.
The Operating Department confirmed, however, that the locomotive is rostered for service on Sunday.
On the question of the age of Butler Henderson it is interesting to note that the usually quoted building date is 1919.
Sources place the completion of the locomotive in December of that year.
That said, the building plate on the locomotive indicates that the construction took place at Gorton in 1920.
Another  persistent rumour is that the National Railway Museum V2 No. 4771 Green Arrow will see service on the railway before becoming a static exhibit at York.
Sadly, the Great Central Railway were unable to confirm that this will happen in the  foreseeable future.
Pride of the Cambrian
Keeping to time on Welsh Coast specials
It was service as usual on the final Cambrian Limited run last Sunday.
By and large timekeeping was restored to the excellent precedents set in June, writes JAKE RAYMOND.
A possible late arrival at Aberystwyth on the west bound leg behind Standard 4 No 75069 was averted by repeating the previous week's curtailed stop at Machynlleth.
Departure of the return leg was delayed and the locomotive was over 15 minutes late at Borth some five or six miles out of Aberystwyth.
That said it was going very strongly at the time and there was much speculation amongst linesiders as to how No 7819 Hinton Manor would tackle the 1 in 52 climb to Talerddig summit.
In the previous week the manor had cut the time to the summit by five minutes, but this was still two minutes short of the performance of No 75069 in June.
There were reports that the coal used on the trip of Sunday September 22 has proved to be unsatisfactory and better things were predicted during coaling and watering of the locomotives at Aberystwyth.
However, as before, No 7819 started in spectacular fashion only to falter on the latter part of the climb.
Timings were not available as we went to press but it seems that this year's performance honours must go to the Riddles machine.
I saw the Manor at Welshpool where a Class 37 and its passengers awaited its arrival.
They were not kept waiting, the train coming in exactly to schedule.
As before, patronage of the Cambrian Limited was exceptional.
The runs have captured the imagination of the enthusiasts and it is to be hoped that British Rail will allow these trains to run in 1992.
On the assumption that they will, there are one or two operational points which, if repeated, are well worth looking out for.
The locomotives were placed in position by hauling, tender first, the  preceding and following service trains.
It was magical in June, at Towyn, to see the faces of youngsters who had boarded a two-coach DMU headed by No. 75069.
I observed that this policy was repeated last Sunday and No 75069 was rostered to haul four coaches from Aberystwyth to Machynlleth, with a scheduled departure time of 18.10.
Notices at Aberystwyth and Machynlleth also announced that there would also be a special train from Machynlleth to Shrewsbury at 10.45 at a cost of £15.
On the Sunday the anticipation was that this train was to be a double-headed and that a six-coach rake would be provided.
Our press date prevents us giving details of this run but it must have been quite a spectacle if it went ahead as reported, and would have provided a fitting finale to an outstanding season of operations.
7819 Hinton Manor warms to its task and is pictured at Borth with the eastbound leg of the Cambrian Limited on Sunday, September 29th.
Bahamas on duty
The special Charter Train from Oxenhope-Carlisle and return, which is being organised by Keighley Business Forum — and hauled by 45596 Bahamas throughout, has a number of spare seats which are now being made available to the public.
The train departs Oxenhope at 09.00 hrs on Saturday, October 19th and calls at Ingrow and Keighley before heading out over the S & C.
The fare for the two-way steam extravaganza is a very modest £39.
To enquire about or obtain tickets telephone Ian Copping on 0535–618014 during office hours or Tom Cozens on 061–881–9041