

ONE
It was dark by the time he reached his destination.
He got out of the taxi, paid the driver, then wiped the sweat from his forehead with the back of his hand.
He had forgotten how humid it could get in Beirut at that time of year.
He waited until the taxi had driven off before crossing the road to the Windorah, a small bar run by Dave Jenkins, an Australian who had named it after his birthplace in Queensland.
Well, he assumed Jenkins still ran it.
He hadn't been back to Beirut in four years.
He pushed open the door and went inside.
Nothing had changed.
The two large propeller fans still rotated slowly above the room, the prostitutes still mingled with the foreign journalists and Jenkins was still behind the counter.
Their eyes met.
Jenkins shook his head in disbelief.
‘Well, I'll be damned.
Mike Graham.
What the hell brings you back to Beirut?’
‘Business,’ Graham answered, his eyes flickering slowly around the room.
‘Lookin' for somebody?’
‘Yeah.’
‘Russell Laidlaw?’
Graham turned back to Jenkins, his eyes narrowed.
‘He told you I was coming?’
Jenkins shook his head.
‘An educated guess, that's all.
He's the only old friend of yours I know who comes in here every night.
What time did he say he'd meet you?’
‘Eight,’ Graham replied, glancing at his watch.
It was seven fifty.
‘That's when he usually gets here.
You want a beer while you wait?’
Although Graham rarely touched alcohol, he could do with a beer in the heat.
‘If it's cold.’
‘Comin' up,’ Jenkins replied then bent down to open one of the fridges under the counter.
A prostitute caught Graham's eye but he shook his head before she could get off her bar stool.
She gave him an indifferent look then turned her attention to another potential customer.
‘One Budweiser, ice cold,’ Jenkins said, placing the bottle and a glass in front of Graham.
He held up a hand when Graham reached for his wallet.
‘It's on me, Mike.’
‘Thanks,’ Graham said, forcing a quick smile.
‘I was real sorry to hear about what happened to your family, Mike —‘
‘I'll be over there,’ Graham cut in sharply and indicated an empty table in the corner of the room.
‘Tell Russell when he gets here.’
‘Sure,’ Jenkins replied but Graham had already gone.
He shrugged then turned his attention to a new customer at the other end of the counter.
Graham crossed to the table and sat down.
He was thirty-eight years old with a youthfully handsome face, tousled auburn hair that hung untidily over the  collar of his open-necked white shirt and a sturdy, muscular physique which he kept in shape with a daily five-kilometre run followed by a punishing workout in his own private gymnasium.
He had been with UNACO for two years and, despite his maverick tendencies, he was widely regarded by his peers as the best field operative in the organization.
It hadn't always been that way.
He was the first to admit that he had been psychologically screwed-up when he joined them after eleven years with the elite American anti-terrorist squad, Delta — a state of mind that had come about as a result of his last Delta mission.
The mission had been to penetrate a terrorist base in Libya and eliminate all personnel, which included Salim Al-Makesh, an advisor to the Black June, a movement founded by Abu Nidal in I976 in protest at the involvement of Syria in the Lebanese civil war, and Jean-Jacques Bernard, a senior member of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
He was about to give the order to advance when news reached him that his wife and five-year-old son had been abducted by three masked men outside their apartment in New York.
The men spoke Arabic.
It had been an attempt to force him to withdraw.
He refused and although the base was destroyed, Al-Makesh and Bernard managed to escape.
The FBI immediately launched a nation-wide hunt for his family but no trace of them was ever found.
A month later Al-Makesh was killed by Israeli commandos at his home in Damascus.
Bernard went into hiding and was only heard of again when news reached the Israeli Mossad that he had been assassinated  in a car-bomb attack in Beirut.
The information had come from a reliable source and they had no reason to doubt it.
Graham remained unconvinced.
It had been too easy.
Then, the previous day, he received a telephone call that vindicated his years of scepticism…
Laidlaw entered the bar, looked around slowly, then crossed to where Graham was sitting.
Graham could hardly believe how much Laidlaw had changed since he had last seen him when they were both still with Delta.
Laidlaw had always been the unit's fitness fanatic, pushing himself to the limit to keep his lean, muscular body in shape.
And he had always been so meticulous about his appearance, almost to the point of vanity.
Now he was overweight with a bloated, unshaven face and his unwashed brown hair fell untidily onto his hunched shoulders.
Graham rose to his feet and shook Laidlaw's extended hand.
The grip was still firm.
He indicated the chair opposite and sat down again.
‘I'm just going to get myself a beer.
I won't be a moment,’ Laidlaw said, indicating the counter behind him.
Graham pushed his untouched bottle across the table.
‘Have this one.
I don't want it.’
Laidlaw picked up the bottle then pulled out the chair and sat down.
‘You're looking well, Mike,’ he said at length.
‘You're not,’ Graham replied bluntly.
‘Christ, Russ, what the hell's happened to you?’
Laidlaw poured out his beer then sat back and exhaled deeply.
‘It's a long story, Mike.
I'll tell you  about it sometime.’
He drank a mouthful of beer then placed the glass on the table.
‘How was the flight from New York?’
‘Fine,’ Graham replied brusquely then sat forward, his arms resting on the table.
‘Have you found out any more about Bernard?’
Laidlaw shook his head.
‘Nothing came of the enquiries I made this morning.
I did see him, Mike.
He's changed, though.
The beard and long hair have gone.
I had to take a long, hard look at him before I was sure.
But it was him, I'd stake my life on it.’
‘I wouldn't be here if I didn't believe you,’ Graham replied softly.
‘So what's our next move?’
‘Barak.’
Graham frowned.
‘Nazar Barak?’
Laidlaw nodded.
‘He's the best informer Delta's ever had in Beirut.
I still see him about.
If anyone knows where Bernard is, then it'll be Barak.’
‘Why didn't you speak to him this morning?’
Laidlaw drank another mouthful of beer.
‘You try pinning him down at such short notice.
He'll be at home tonight about nine.
I have that from a reliable source.’
‘I'm just amazed he's still around.
I thought someone would have put a bullet in his back by now.’
‘He knows too much.
And it's all written down and stored away in some bank vault in the city.’
‘You're joking,’ Graham muttered.
‘That's the story he's put around.
I doubt it's true but it's certainly worked.
Nobody's called his bluff.’
‘Yet,’ Graham added.
Laidlaw smiled wryly then drank the remainder of  the beer.
He wiped the back of his hand across his mouth then stood up.
‘If we get to the house early we can grab him when he arrives.
It's the only way we'll get to talk to him tonight.’
Graham gave Jenkins a wave then followed Laidlaw out into the street.
Barak's house turned out to be a small bungalow in West Beirut, less than a mile away from the Mar Elias Camp.
It was in darkness.
Laidlaw drove past it and pulled up at the end of the dirt road.
He switched off the engine then reached into his pocket for his cigarettes and lit the third one since leaving the Windorah.
Graham climbed from the car and instinctively ducked as a mortar exploded in the distance.
When he straightened up he saw Laidlaw looking at him across the roof of the car, a faint smile on his lips.
‘You get used to it,’ Laidlaw said, closing the door behind him.
‘I don't know how you can live here,’ Graham said then winced as another explosion rocked the night.
‘It's become a part of me.
I could never leave.
You only see the negative side of Beirut on the news back home.
There's a lot more to it than that…’
Laidlaw trailed off when a car suddenly came into view at the other end of the dimly lit street.
Graham looked towards Laidlaw for confirmation that it was Barak.
Laidlaw shielded his eyes against the glare of the headlights, trying to distinguish the make and colour of the car.
A green Peugeot.
He nodded then dropped his cigarette and ground it underfoot.
Barak parked in front of the house and climbed out of the car, locking the door behind him.
He was a short, fat man in his early fifties with greasy black hair and thick pebble glasses.
The passenger door opened and an ageing prostitute got out.
‘Having a party, Barak?’
Barak swung round then let out a deep sigh when Laidlaw emerged from the shadows of an oak tree on the other side of the road.
‘You startled me, Mr Laidlaw,’ he said breathlessly in English and clamped his hand over his heart as if to emphasize the point.
‘What are you doing here?’
‘We need to talk.’
‘We can talk tomorrow,’ Barak replied then glanced lasciviously at the prostitute.
‘I am busy tonight.’
‘You were busy tonight,’ Laidlaw corrected him.
‘Get rid of her.’
A look of concern crossed Barak's face.
‘I have already paid her for tonight.’
‘You'll be reimbursed.’
The prostitute, who didn't speak English, demanded to know what was happening.
Barak managed to pacify her then turned back to Laidlaw.
‘She will need money for a taxi back to the city.’
‘Then give it to her,’ Laidlaw said.
‘Me?’
Barak replied in horror.
‘Why should I pay her?’
‘I've told you, you'll be reimbursed,’ Laidlaw snapped angrily.
‘Now pay her and get her out of here.’
Barak pulled a roll of banknotes from his jacket  pocket, reluctantly peeled off a couple and handed them to the prostitute.
She snatched them from him, cursed angrily at them both, then strode off in search of a taxi.
Laidlaw waited until the prostitute was out of sight then nodded to Graham who had been standing by the tree.
Barak's eyes widened in amazement as Graham approached them.
He looked at Laidlaw, searching for an answer.
Laidlaw said nothing.
‘Still as tight as ever, Barak,’ Graham said, indicating the notes in Barak's hand.
Barak instinctively stuffed them back into his pocket then rubbed his hands together nervously.
‘What are you doing back in Beirut, Mr Graham?’
‘Let's go inside,’ Graham said, gesturing towards the house.
Barak led them up a narrow concrete path to the unpainted door and opened it.
He beckoned them inside and immediately closed the door behind him.
He showed them into the lounge and drew the threadbare curtains before switching on the light.
The room was unpainted and the only furniture consisted of a lime green sofa, two wooden chairs and a three-legged coffee table which was propped up against the wall to prevent it from toppling over.
‘This is very irregular,’ Barak said at length.
‘I never do business at my house.
You know that, Mr Laidlaw.
Why did you come here?
If anyone saw you —‘
‘Nobody saw us,’ Graham snapped.
Barak's eyes shifted from Laidlaw to Graham.
‘Why are you here?’
‘Bernard.’
Barak scratched his stubbled chin then sat on the edge of the sofa.
‘Jean-Jacques Bernard?’
‘Yeah.’
‘But he is dead.
He died —‘
‘I saw him outside the American University Hospital yesterday morning,’ Laidlaw cut in quickly.
‘He's changed his appearance but it was Bernard.’
‘You must have been mistaken,’ Barak replied, shaking his head.
‘Bernard is dead.’
‘If Russell says he saw Bernard yesterday then that's good enough for me,’ Graham said sharply.
Barak removed his glasses and rubbed his eyes wearily.
‘I knew Bernard well.
Do you not think I would know if he was still alive, especially if he was living here in Beirut?’
‘I didn't say he was living here,’ Laidlaw replied.
‘He could be here on business.
But it was Bernard.’
Graham took an envelope from his pocket and tossed it onto the sofa.
‘There's five-thousand dollars there, in cash.
Find Bernard and I'll double it.’
Barak opened the envelope and fanned the banknotes with his finger.
He looked across at Graham.
‘Why do you want Bernard so badly?’
‘That doesn't concern you.
Find him and you'll get the rest of the money.’
‘Where are you staying?’
Barak asked Graham.
‘You call me if you find out anything,’ Laidlaw said.
‘Any time, day or night.’
Barak nodded then pushed the envelope into his pocket.
‘I still say you are wasting your time.
Bernard is dead.’
‘For his sake, I hope you're right,’ Graham said  softly then followed Laidlaw down the hallway and out into the night.
Barak waited until Laidlaw and Graham had driven off then got into his own car and drove straight to a white, Spanish-styled mansion on the outskirts of the city, overlooking the sea.
He drew up in front of a pair of wrought-iron gates where he was immediately challenged by a bearded man wearing jeans and a faded black T-shirt.
A kalashnikov AK-47 was slung over his shoulder.
‘I must see Mr Devereux right away,’ Barak announced through the open driver's window.
The guard eyed him contemptuously.
‘Is Mr Devereux expecting you?’
‘No, but it's urgent.’
The guard glanced in the direction of the house.
‘Mr Devereux gave specific instructions not to be disturbed.’
‘Tell him it's Barak —‘
‘I know who you are,’ the guard said with obvious disdain.
‘Come back in the morning.
Maybe then Mr Devereux will see you.’
‘I must see him now!’
Barak retorted.
The guard unslung the kalashnikov.
‘I told you, Mr Devereux isn't to be disturbed tonight.’
Barak glared at the guard.
‘Mr Devereux's life is in danger.
If anything happens to him then I'll see to it that you're held personally responsible.’
The guard wavered.
‘What danger?’
‘I'll tell that to Mr Devereux, when I get to see him.’
The guard turned away from the car and spoke  softly into a two-way radio.
A minute later the gates were activated from somewhere inside the grounds.
The guard peered through the window at Barak.
‘Follow the road to the courtyard.
Someone will be waiting there to meet you.’
Barak put the Peugeot into gear and drove the hundred yards to the courtyard.
He pulled up in front of the stone steps and got out of the car.
Another guard frisked him expertly then led him up the steps into the house.
Barak looked around the spacious hallway in awe.
The three-tier Czechoslovakian crystal chandelier was the only reminder of its once resplendent grandeur.
He could imagine that the walls had once been lined with an array of expensive paintings or tapestries and the wooden floorboards covered with elegant, sculpted carpeting.
‘The house once belonged to a Turkish prince when the Lebanon was still a part of the Ottoman Empire,’ a man said, tying the belt of his white dressing-gown as he descended the stairs.
He was a tall, handsome man in his late thirties with short black hair, which was already beginning to grey at the temples, and a neatly trimmed black moustache.
A faint scar ran the length of his left cheek.
He reached the foot of the stairs and looked around him slowly.
‘Some would call it beautiful,’ he said, still speaking Arabic.
‘All I see is decadence.’
‘I'm sorry to disturb you like this, Mr Devereux —‘
The man held up a hand to silence Barak then turned to the guard beside him and dismissed him with a curt nod of the head.
He waited until he had left then  ushered Barak into a small study.
‘I told you never to come here!’
‘I had no choice,’ Barak replied defensively.
‘I had to speak to you in person.’
‘What is it?’
Barak shifted uneasily on his feet.
‘You've been recognized, Mr Bernard.’
Bernard dug his hands into the pockets of his dressing-gown and moved to the window where he stared across the lawn at the empty swimming pool.
He finally turned back to Barak.
‘Who recognized me?’
‘An American, Russell Laidlaw.’
Bernard pondered the name then shook his head.
‘I don't know him.
Who is he?
A journalist?’
Barak shook his head.
‘He used to be with Delta.
He lives here now.
But he's not your problem.
There was another man with him, Mike Graham.
He offered me ten-thousand dollars to find you for him.
This has got something to do with the murder of his family, hasn't it?
Were you involved?’
Bernard ignored the questions.
‘Where's he staying?’
‘He didn't say.
I'm to contact Laidlaw if I come up with anything.’
Bernard took a cigarette from the pack on the table and lit it.
He exhaled thoughtfully then sat in the armchair in the corner of the room.
‘Tell Graham you've made some enquiries and that you've come up with something.
Arrange to meet him at your house later tonight.’
‘My house?’
Barak stammered.
‘I don't want to get involved —’
‘You're already involved,’ Bernard cut in sharply.
He smiled coldly.
‘Don't worry, I won't kill Graham there.
I can't have the police finding any clues at your house.
You don't have the guile to talk your way out of it.’
Barak knew it would be futile to argue.
‘What time?’ he asked with a resigned sigh.
‘Midnight.
That gives me plenty of time to make the necessary arrangements.
But don't call him until eleven thirty.
That way it will look as if you've been asking around about me.’
Barak rubbed his hands together nervously.
‘What about the extra five-thousand dollars Graham would have paid me?’
Bernard stubbed out the cigarette and got to his feet.
‘Everything you do has to have a price, doesn't it?’
Barak stepped backwards, his eyes flickering between Bernard and the floor.
‘I have to make a living…’
‘You make more money than most people in this town,’ Bernard snapped.
Barak swallowed nervously.
‘I think I should go now.
We can discuss the money another time.’
Bernard grabbed the front of Barak's shirt and slammed him up against the wall.
‘You're paid a retainer every month to keep me informed on developments in and around Beirut.
I don't know how you negotiate your other deals, nor do I want to, but you can be sure you're not going to get another cent out of me.
Is that understood?’
Barak nodded his head vigorously and Bernard let go of his shirt.
Barak dabbed his face with a dirty handkerchief, his eyes wide with fear.
‘And don't even think about trying to double-cross me.
You know what Hezbollah would do to you if anything were to happen to me?’
‘I would never double-cross you, Mr Bernard —‘
‘Devereux!’
Bernard snapped angrily.
‘How many times must I tell you?
Jean-Jacques Bernard is dead.
I'm now Alain Devereux.’
‘I'm sorry, Mr Devereux.
It's just force of habit.’
Bernard gestured towards the door.
‘Get out.’
Barak left the room, leaving the door ajar in his haste to get out of the house.
Bernard took another cigarette from the packet and lit it.
He had always known that Graham would find him again one day.
It had been inevitable.
But now he had the advantage, and he intended to use it…
‘I still say I should go in with you,’ Laidlaw urged after he had parked the car outside Barak's house.
Graham shook his head.
‘We've been through this already.
Barak gave specific instructions that I was to go in alone.
I've got to play by his rules.
He's my only chance of finding Bernard.’
‘It could be a trap.’
‘Don't you think that's crossed my mind?
It's a chance I've got to take.’
Laidlaw sighed deeply then nodded.’
O K, but if you haven't shown your face at the window in the first couple of minutes I'm coming in after you.’
‘Deal,’ Graham replied and got out of the car.
Laidlaw watched Graham until he had disappeared into the house then touched his holstered P220 automatic as if to reassure himself.
Not that he would  use it.
He couldn't.
Not since that fateful mission in Honduras.
He had tried several times at a local shooting range but he couldn't bring himself to pull the trigger.
He knew it was psychological.
It was why he had been forced to retire from Delta.
But he couldn't tell Graham.
How could he?
Graham was depending on him.
He wiped the sweat from his forehead, willing Graham to appear at the window.
Where the hell was he?
The gunshot came from inside the house.
Then silence.
Laidlaw banged the steering wheel angrily with his fist.
It had been a trap.
Why hadn't Graham listened to him?
He pushed open the door and scrambled out of the car, careful to keep out of sight of the house.
He pulled the automatic from his holster but stopped short of curling his finger around the trigger.
Sweating, he peered round the side of the car at the house.
It was in darkness, just as it had been when they had been there earlier that evening.
He would have to go round to the back.
He ran, doubled-over, to the adjoining house.
It, too, was in darkness.
But that was to be expected.
Staying alive in Beirut depended on ignoring trouble.
He vaulted over the gate and hurried up the narrow driveway.
An overgrown hedge divided the two properties.
He found a hole in it and squeezed his way through.
Barak's back door was barely ten yards away from where he was crouched.
He wiped the sweat from his eyes and looked down at the automatic in his hand.
But he still couldn't bring himself to touch the trigger.
He cursed himself angrily.
What happened if the gunman was still in the house?
Could he defend himself?
He was breathing heavily, but it had nothing to do with the run he had made from the car.
It was fear.
Delta had taught him that fear was all in the mind.
It could be overcome.
But that was when he could still pull a trigger.
He swallowed hard and ran to the back door, pressing himself against the wall beside it.
He bit his lip as he tried to thread his finger through the trigger guard.
It was almost as if an invisible hand were pressing his finger against the barrel.
He couldn't do it.
He gritted his teeth and tested the handle.
The door was unlocked.
He kicked it open and dived into the small kitchen, rolling to the safety of the old, battered fridge.
He remained there for a few seconds then slowly got to his feet and moved to the door leading into the hallway.
Again he pressed himself against the wall and peered cautiously into the hall.
At first he couldn't see anything in the semi-darkness.
But as his eyes grew accustomed to it he could make out a hand protruding from the open lounge doorway.
He was about to swivel round into the hall when he heard the sound of a car starting up outside the house.
He recognized the sound of the engine straight away.
It was Barak's Peugeot.
He ducked into the first door down the hall.
It turned out to be a bedroom.
Hurrying to the window, he peered through a tear in the curtains just in time to see the Peugeot drive off, heading towards the city.
There was only one person inside but he couldn't make out who it was.
It could have been Barak.
Or the killer.
Unless Barak was the killer.
He doubted that.
Barak hated violence, especially if it involved guns.
He made his way carefully down the hall until he  reached the lounge.
Pressing himself against the wall he looked down at the body.
It was Barak.
He was lying face down, blood seeping from the bullet hole in his back.
Laidlaw checked for a pulse.
He was dead.
Laidlaw stared at the body.
There had only been one shot.
So where was Graham?
He stood up slowly and entered the lounge.
It was empty.
He quickly checked the remaining rooms.
They, too, were empty.
He called out Graham's name but there was no reply.
Graham had gone.
And Barak was dead.
It only left one possible explanation.
Graham had been in the Peugeot.
He had killed Barak.
Laidlaw couldn't believe it.
Why?
Then a sudden thought flashed through his mind.
What was it Graham had said back at the Windorah about Barak?
For a moment he couldn't remember his exact words.
Then they came to him.
‘I thought someone would have put a bullet in his back by now…’
Laidlaw didn't care that Barak was dead.
What did bother him was that Graham used him to get at Barak.
That hurt, especially after all they had been through together.
He looked down at Barak's body again.
One of the neighbours was sure to have made an anonymous call to the police, reporting the gunshot.
And it would only be a matter of time before they came to investigate.
He left the way he had come.
He couldn't get involved.
There would be too much explaining to do.
TWO
New York was swathed in sunlight.
Temperatures were in the high seventies and with the absence of any wind it felt sticky and humid.
On the twenty-second floor of the United Nations building, overlooking the East River, Malcolm Philpott was also feeling the heat.
A fifty-six-year-old Scot with gaunt features and fine wavy hair, he had been UNACO Director since its inception in 1980.
He reached for his handkerchief and dabbed his forehead again — a cold, clammy sweat that only seemed to have surfaced in the last half an hour.
Was he going down with an infection?
He wouldn't have been surprised.
He was a workaholic and he knew his body was run down and in need of rest.
But how could he rest with so much activity going on at UNACO headquarters?
Especially now with Mike Graham's maverick action in Beirut.
He pushed his handkerchief back into his pocket and looked across at his deputy, Sergei Kolchinsky, a Russian in his early fifties who had become an invaluable member of the team since joining UNACO from the KGB four years earlier.
He had a brilliant tactical mind and had helped to crack some of UNACO's toughest assignments in the past.
Neither man had spoken for the last few minutes.
Both were smoking, Philpott his pipe and Kolchinsky a cigarette.
Three unopened files lay on Philpott's desk.
Each had a name typed on its cover: Mike Graham; C.W. Whitlock; and Sabrina Carver.
They made up one of the ten elite ‘Strike Force’ teams, all top field operatives who had been siphoned off from police, military and intelligence services around the world.
They were able to request anything they wanted from their administrative colleagues which they felt could aid them on any given mission.
Those requests used to have to go through either Philpott or Kolchinsky, but they had recently decided to waive the routine and allow the field operatives a free hand.
Now both men regretted ever having made the decision.
They had discovered that Graham had drawn three false passports, in the names of Michael Green, Miles Grant and Mark Gordon, and used one of them to fly to Beirut.
He had managed to get a Beretta from a contact in Beirut which was now in the hands of the local police.
It had his fingerprints on it.
It had been fired once — the bullet which had killed Barak.
And now Graham was missing.
He was a wanted man in the Lebanon and UNACO couldn't do anything publicly without endangering their own clandestine existence.
That meant Graham was on his own.
Certainly for the time being…
‘Malcolm, are you feeling alright?’
Kolchinsky asked, breaking the silence.
‘You're looking very pale.’
‘I'm fine,’ Philpott replied tersely then reached for his cane and got to his feet.
He moved to the window, walking with a pronounced limp on his left leg, the result of a shrapnel wound in the last days of the Korean War.
He turned back to Kolchinsky, his eyes blazing.
‘I can't believe he could have been that stupid.
We've made plenty of enemies over the years, even politicians here at the UN, and this will provide them with the perfect ammunition for them to shoot UNACO down in flames.
We've got to find him before the Lebanese authorities do.
If he goes on trial we may as well all start looking for other jobs.
UNACO will be crucified.’
Kolchinsky gave a resigned nod.
‘What do you suggest?’
‘We've got to bring C.W. and Sabrina in on the case as quickly as possible.
But we can't do anything until I've spoken to Langley.’
‘What have the CIA to do with this?’
Kolchinsky asked with a frown.
‘I'm as much in the dark as you are, Sergei.
I got a call from their Deputy Director, Robert Bailey, this morning.
He wouldn't go into details over the phone but he said it had something to do with Bernard.
He's coming over later this morning to see me.’
‘Do you want me to see to C.W. and Sabrina?’
‘Yes, put them on a Code Red standby.
I want them here by two at the latest —’ Philpott stopped abruptly as a crushing pain seared through his chest, radiating out to his neck, jaw and arms.
His cane fell from his grasp and he sagged forward against the wall.
Kolchinsky leaped from his chair and grabbed Philpott before he could fall to the floor.
Philpott  clutched his chest in agony.
It felt as if it were going to burst.
The pain was unbearable.
His eyes watered as the pain increased.
He tried to speak but he couldn't get the words out.
He thought he was about to die.
At that moment he would have welcomed it, an escape from the agony burning through his chest.
Kolchinsky lowered him carefully to the floor then flicked on the intercom switch on the desk.
‘Sarah, call an ambulance.
And hurry.
The Colonel's had a heart attack.’
He switched off the intercom before she could reply and hurried back to where Philpott lay.
He remembered his first-aid training with the KGB — always keep the sufferer as warm and calm as possible.
He took off his jacket and placed it over Philpott's chest.
‘You're going to be alright, Malcolm.
Sarah's calling for an ambulance.’
The pain had subsided to a tightness of the chest.
He suddenly felt cold but he could also feel the sweat running down the sides of his face.
He had known right away what had happened.
His mother had suffered two heart attacks before the third one had killed her.
He knew the symptoms.
A coronary thrombosis, the doctor had called it.
It was strange.
He felt perfectly lucid yet he couldn't speak.
The words wouldn't reach his lips.
Kolchinsky noticed Philpott trying to speak and squeezed his arm reassuringly.
‘Don't try and say anything, Malcolm.
You're going to be alright.’
The door slid open and Sarah Thomas, Philpott's secretary, hurried across to where Kolchinsky was  crouched.
‘The ambulance is on its way.
It should be here in about ten minutes.’
‘Have you told security it's on its way?’
She nodded.
‘Can I do anything to help?’ she whispered.
Kolchinsky shook his head.
‘The worst's over.
He's going to be alright, don't worry.’
He turned towards her.
‘Get hold of Sabrina and C.W. Tell them I want them here by two this afternoon.’
Sarah returned to the outer office.
Her hands were shaking when she picked up the receiver and dialled the number of Sabrina's flat.
Sabrina wasn't in her flat.
She was taking in the boutiques on Fifth Avenue.
It was her second-favourite pastime.
Her favourite was listening to jazz, either live at one of her regular haunts, Ali's Alley or the Village Vanguard, or sitting at home with the headphones on, listening to the likes of David Sanborn or the Yellowjackets.
Sanborn was her idol and she tried to get to as many of his live gigs as possible when he was playing in New York.
Jazz had become a way of life for her.
She was dressed casually in a pair of faded Levi jeans, brown ankle boots and a baggy white T-shirt.
Her shoulder-length blond hair was hidden underneath a New York Yankees baseball cap, a present from Mike Graham.
She was a stunning twenty-eight-year-old with a near perfect figure, which she kept in shape with regular aerobics classes, and she had a friendly, outgoing disposition.
She had given up counting the number of marriage proposals she had  turned down over the years.
Her independence was too important to her.
Moreover, any serious relationship could well jeopardize her position with UNACO.
As far as her friends were concerned, she was a translator at the United Nations.
None of them knew that she had been with the FBI for two years, where she had specialized in the use of firearms, before joining UNACO three years ago.
She was still the only female field operative in the organization but her gutsy determination and self-confidence had won over her male colleagues who now regarded her as an equal.
She could think of no greater compliment.
She paused in front of Barnes and Noble and pretended to look at the book display in the window.
She was sure she was being followed.
Not that she had seen anyone.
It was just an instinct that came with the job.
She waited a few moments then turned into East 48th Street, still pretending to look in the shop windows as she walked.
She didn't increase her pace — it would only alert her pursuer.
But who was it?
She was more than capable of defending herself if the need arose, but what if her pursuer was someone who had recognized her from a previous UNACO assignment, someone out to blow her cover?
That did frighten her.
She stopped again, this time in the doorway of a delicatessen, and reached into her bag for her sunglasses.
She slid them on.
Now she could use the shop windows to look behind her without arousing any suspicions.
A movement caught her eye as she stepped back out onto the pavement but before she could react a black youth shot past her on rollerskates, snatching the bag out of her hand.
He dodged between the  startled shoppers, none of whom made any attempt to stop him.
She immediately sprinted after him.
He glanced over his shoulder and grinned at her, knowing she couldn't catch up with him, but when he looked round he found himself heading straight for a display of fresh produce outside a delicatessen.
He swerved sharply to the left but his leg hit the edge of the wooden stand and he fell heavily to the ground, spilling an assortment of fruit across the pavement.
He scrambled to his feet and looked round nervously at Sabrina who was closing in fast on him.
He set off again, his face now twisted in pain, and flung the bag to an accomplice in an alley twenty yards further on.
Sabrina ignored the fleeing youth on the rollerskates and went in pursuit of his accomplice.
She followed him through a network of alleyways until he mistakenly darted into a cul-de-sac.
He realized his mistake too late and when he turned back to the entrance Sabrina was already there, blocking his escape.
She was breathing heavily, her hands on her hips.
She met the youth's eyes.
He was a Puerto Rican, no older than twenty, with long, greasy black hair and a red headband.
He pulled a switchblade from his pocket and opened it inches from his leg.
‘You want some?’ he asked, the switchblade extended menacingly towards her.
‘I don't want any trouble,’ she said calmly then held out her hand towards him.
‘Give me the bag and that will be the end of it.’
The youth laughed then spat on the ground.
‘You want the bag, you come and get it.’
Sabrina shrugged and moved towards the youth.
He  dropped the bag then, tightening his grip on the switchblade, he waited until she was in range before lunging at her, the blade slashing the air inches from her face.
Pity to cut such a pretty face but she'd asked for it.
He grinned as he came at her again.
She waited until he stabbed at her then, using her left forearm to block his wrist, she followed up by slamming the heel of her right hand against his chin and kneeing him in the groin.
He cried out in agony and stumbled back against the wall.
The switchblade fell from his hand as he sagged to the ground, whimpering softly, his hands clutched between his legs.
She picked up the bag, checked inside to see that everything was still there, and was about to confiscate the switchblade when she heard the sound of a police siren in the distance.
She couldn't be involved in a police investigation.
The way in which she had dispatched her attacker would certainly make news.
She ducked into the adjoining alley.
The siren was getting closer.
She ran to the end of the alley and was about to scale the ten-foot wire fence when the bleeper attached to her belt suddenly shrilled into life.
It was UNACO headquarters.
Of all the times for them to call, she thought irritably.
She switched it off then clambered over the fence, landing nimbly on her toes, and walked down another alley which brought her out onto Madison Avenue.
She called headquarters from a phone booth, spoke briefly to Sarah, then hurried to the curb to signal a taxi to take her back to her flat.
‘Afternoon, François.’
The  maître d'hôtel looked up from his reservation book and smiled warmly.
‘Ah, good afternoon, Mr Whitlock.
You are looking well.’
‘I am, thank you.
Has my wife arrived yet?’
‘Not yet,’ François replied.
‘I'll be in the bar.
Tell her when she arrives.’
‘Of course,’ came the cordial reply.
Whitlock had been going to Le Chantilly restaurant on East 57th Street since he had first arrived in New York in 1980.
It was where he had taken a vivacious Puerto Rican paediatrician, Carmen Rodriguez, on their first date.
A year later to the day he had proposed to her at the same table.
They had been married now for seven years.
He hoisted himself onto one of the bar stools and nodded in greeting to the barman who was busy serving another customer.
The barman smiled back and told Whitlock he would be with him shortly.
Whitlock was a forty-four-year-old Kenyan with sharp, angular features softened by the neatly trimmed black moustache he had worn since leaving university in his early twenties.
He was photophobic and always wore a pair of tinted glasses to protect his eyes.
He had been educated in England and after graduating from Oxford had returned to Kenya where he served with the Intelligence Corps for ten years before being recruited to UNACO as one of its first field operatives.
He was now the only survivor of the original team.
‘What can I get you to drink, Mr Whitlock?’ the barman asked, leaning his hands on the counter in front of Whitlock.
‘The usual, Rick,’ Whitlock replied.
The barman nodded, took a bottle of beer from the fridge and opened it.
He poured the beer into a glass and placed it on a coaster in front of Whitlock.
‘How are things in the world of politics, Mr Whitlock?’ he asked, referring to Whitlock's cover as a member of the Kenyan embassy at the United Nations.
Carmen was the only person outside UNACO who knew about the deception.
‘The usual, Rick.’
The barman, sensing Whitlock wasn't in a talkative mood, left him alone.
Whitlock took a sip of beer then glanced over his shoulder at the entrance.
Still no sign of Carmen.
He turned the glass slowly on the coaster as he thought about her.
Their marriage had nearly ended a few months back.
Well, that was when it had all come to a head.
But it had been simmering for a couple of years before that.
It all stemmed from her desire for him to leave UNACO.
She was frightened for his safety.
But he had been adamant: he was staying.
She had finally walked out on him and it had only been the intervention of Philpott that had brought them back together again.
He had told them that Whitlock would be promoted to Deputy Director when he retired at the end of the year.
Kolchinsky would take over as Director.
Then, after a year, Kolchinsky would step down and Whitlock would take his place.
Other than the four of them, and the Secretary-General, the only other person who knew about it was Jacques Rust, head of UNACO European operation, based in Zurich.
Carmen had then thrown her full support behind him, knowing he  would be out of the field by the end of the year.
Whitlock knew he would miss working in the field, especially with Mike and Sabrina, but he also knew it would be a small price to pay to keep his marriage intact.
And that meant everything to him…
‘C.W.?’
Whitlock looked round sharply, startled by the voice behind him.
He grinned ruefully at his wife then kissed her lightly on the lips.
‘How long have you been standing there?’
‘A few seconds,’ she replied, allowing him to help her onto the adjacent bar stool.
‘I'm sorry, I was miles away.’
‘So I noticed.’
She ordered a spritzer then turned back to him, her face solemn.
‘I've got some bad news.
Rosie was arrested last night.’
Whitlock stared at her in horror.
Rosie was the teenage daughter of Carmen's sister, Rachel, and her German husband, Eddie Kruger.
The barman placed the spritzer in front of her.
She waited until he was out of earshot before continuing.
‘She was caught buying drugs in Times Square.
I don't know what it was.
Rachel didn't say.’
Whitlock sighed deeply and shook his head sadly.
‘I suppose I shouldn't be that surprised.’
‘And what exactly is that supposed to mean?’ she demanded.
‘Come off it, Carmen, you know damn well what I'm talking about.
They've hardly been the best parents in the world, have they?
Rachel had that affair with her boss and Eddie's drinking has been getting steadily worse these last couple of years —’
‘She had that affair as an escape from Eddie's drinking,’ Carmen cut in quickly.
‘That's irrelevant.
Look at it from Rosie's perspective.
Can't you see?
This is her way of escaping from them .’
‘Will you talk to her?’
He shook his head.
‘No; it's up to Eddie and Rachel to talk to her.’
‘Rachel asked if you would.’
‘Where's Eddie?’
‘He went to an all-night poker game last night.
She hasn't seen him since.’
‘Some father,’ Whitlock muttered.
‘Talk to her, C.W. You're the only person she's ever listened to in the past.’
‘I'm not using UNACO to pull any strings, Carmen.
Let's get that straight right from the start.’
‘Just talk to her,’ she replied softly.
‘Please.’
‘O K,’ he replied at length.
‘Where is she?’
‘At home.
Rachel put up the bail —‘
The bleeper clipped to Whitlock's belt suddenly activated and he was quick to silence it.
He shot Carmen a despairing look.
‘This is all I need right now.
I have to answer it, Carmen.’
‘I know,’ she replied and squeezed his hand gently.
‘I will talk to her, I promise you.
But when I don't know.
It all depends on what's come up,’ he said, patting the bleeper.
‘Would you like to use this phone, Mr Whitlock?’ the barman asked, having heard the bleeper from the other side of the bar.
‘No, but thanks anyway, Rick,’ Whitlock replied  then turned back to Carmen.
‘I've suddenly lost my appetite.’
‘I lost mine when I heard about Rosie,’ Carmen replied.
‘Come on then, let's go.’
Sarah Thomas had been Philpott's secretary for the last five years.
Her sparsely furnished office on the twenty-second floor of the United Nations building was an antechamber to the UNACO headquarters.
The wall opposite the door, constructed of rows of teak slats, contained two seamless sliding doors, invisible to the naked eye, which could only be activated by miniature sonic transmitters.
The door to the right led into the UNACO Command Centre, a soundproofed room where teams of analysts worked around the clock to monitor the fluctuating developments in world affairs.
The door to the left led into Philpott's private office.
Kolchinsky sat behind Philpott's desk, his eyes riveted on Whitlock and Sabrina.
He had just broken the news to them about Philpott.
‘Will he be alright?’
Sabrina asked anxiously, breaking the sudden silence.
‘I spoke to the doctor before I left the hospital.
He's optimistic that the Colonel will make a complete recovery.
They're keeping him in hospital for another few days to carry out more tests.’
‘Unless he discharges himself first,’ Whitlock said and eyed Kolchinsky knowingly.
‘He'll want to be back at work as soon as possible.
You know the Colonel.’
‘I've already been in touch with the Secretary-General.
He's going to see the Colonel tonight to tell him to take a month's leave after he's been discharged from hospital.’
‘I wish him luck,’ Whitlock said.
‘You know just how stubborn the Colonel can be when he wants to get his own way.’
‘I don't think he'll put up much resistance this time,’ Kolchinsky replied then paused to light a cigarette.
‘He's been overworking and he knows it.
The next attack could be fatal.’
They lapsed into silence again.
Whitlock got to his feet and crossed to the dispenser against the wall.
‘Coffee anyone?’
They both shook their heads.
‘Where's Mike?’
Whitlock asked, pouring himself a coffee.
‘That's a good question,’ Kolchinsky replied gruffly.
‘The last I heard was that he's on the run from the authorities in Beirut.’
‘What?’
Sabrina asked in astonishment.
‘Beirut?’
Whitlock said, pausing in front of the desk to look down at Kolchinsky.
‘Is he on assignment?’
‘No, he is not,’ Kolchinsky boomed angrily, stressing each word in turn.
‘He's gone after Bernard.’
‘Jean-Jacques Bernard?’
Sabrina said, her eyes flickering between Kolchinsky and Whitlock.
‘He's dead, isn't he?’
‘Sit down, C.W.,’ Kolchinsky said, waving towards the black leather sofa where Sabrina was sitting.
‘I'll tell you what I know so far.
And believe me, it isn't much.’
Kolchinsky waited until Whitlock was seated before opening the file on the desk in front of him and outlining the sketchy details Philpott had received from their UNACO contact in Beirut earlier that morning.
‘Mike would never have shot this Barak in the back,’ Sabrina said once Kolchinsky had finished.
‘That's cold-blooded murder.
He's been set up —‘
Spare the lecture, Sabrina,’ Kolchinsky cut in sharply.
He placed the cigarette on the edge of the ashtray before looking at her again.
‘Look, I hear what you're saying.
And if it's any consolation, I don't think he shot Barak either.
But we can't be sure until we find him.
And we have to find him, quickly.’
‘What if the person who murdered Barak killed Mike as well?’
Whitlock said and immediately noticed the look of horror on Sabrina's face.
He turned to her.
‘It's a possibility we have to face.’
‘Why set Michael up to take the rap then kill him?
If the killer wanted Michael dead, why not shoot him at Barak's house?’
Kolchinsky shook his head.
‘No, if Michael was set up then it's obvious the killer wants him alive.’
‘What about Laidlaw?’
Sabrina asked.
‘Have any of our people contacted him?’
‘We can't risk it,’ Kolchinsky replied.
‘The police know he met Michael last night.
They don't have any evidence linking him to the murder but you can be sure they'll be watching his every move.
That's where you come in.’
‘How?’
‘You're going over there as Michael's girlfriend.
And it's imperative that you play it all above board.
Contact the police once you arrive to let them know you're looking for him.
That way you'll be able to see Laidlaw without arousing their suspicions.
I'm not saying you'll find out anything, but you have to start somewhere.’
‘Where do I come in?’
Whitlock asked.
‘You'll find out soon enough,’ Kolchinsky replied then pressed the intercom button on the desk.
‘Sarah, ask Mr Bailey to come through.’
Kolchinsky used a miniature transmitter to activate the door.
Moments later Sarah appeared, followed by a man in a pale grey suit.
He was in his early fifties with wavy black hair and a craggy face which was scarred around the cheeks and mouth from teenage acne.
He smiled quickly at Sarah when she withdrew and closed the door behind her.
Kolchinsky came round from behind the desk and the two men shook hands.
He introduced Whitlock and Sabrina to Bailey who then sat down on the second black leather sofa and took a cigar from his pocket.
He unwrapped the cellophane then looked across at Kolchinsky.
‘I was shocked to hear about Colonel Philpott.
How is he?’
‘He's expected to make a full recovery,’ Kolchinsky replied.
‘That is good news.
Please send him my regards when you next see him.
We may not have always seen eye to eye in the past but I have great respect for him nevertheless.’
Bailey lit the cigar and exhaled the smoke towards the ceiling.
‘Have you had a chance to look through the dossier I sent you this morning?’
‘I've read it,’ Kolchinsky said, unable to keep the disdain from his voice.
‘And have you briefed your operatives?’
Bailey asked, indicating Whitlock and Sabrina on the adjacent sofa.
‘They've only just got here.
We've been talking about the events in Beirut.’
‘That's understandable,’ Bailey said with the hint of a smile.
‘It's quite a mess he's got you into, isn't it?’
‘You let us worry about that, Mr Bailey,’ Kolchinsky replied icily.
‘I'll let you explain the gist of the dossier to C.W. and Sabrina.
After all, it is your dirty work.’
Bailey got to his feet and moved to the window.
He puffed thoughtfully on the cigar then turned back to face Whitlock and Sabrina.
‘What I'm about to tell you can never be repeated outside these four walls.
It's one of the CIA's most closely guarded secrets and I intend to keep it that way.
Any indiscretion on your part —‘
‘There will be no indiscretion on their part,’ Kolchinsky cut in angrily, his eyes blazing.
Bailey shrugged, not altogether convinced by Kolchinsky's outburst.
But he let it pass.
‘It would never have needed to come out if Graham hadn't rushed off to Beirut to find Bernard.’
He paused to draw on the cigar, still loath to reveal what he had come to say.
When he spoke it was in a barely audible voice as if he feared that his words would carry beyond the four walls.
‘Jean-Jacques Bernard works for me.’
‘Bernard's CIA?’
Whitlock said in astonishment.
Bailey nodded.
‘Was he working for you when Mike's family were kidnapped?’
Sabrina demanded.
‘Yes,’ Bailey answered then held up his hand to silence Sabrina before she could speak again.
‘But the kidnapping had nothing to do with him.
It was carried out on the orders of Salim Al-Makesh to give himself time to flee the terrorist base before Delta destroyed it.’
‘And now Al-Makesh is dead.
How convenient.’
‘You can drop the sarcasm, Sabrina,’ Kolchinsky said sharply, pointing a finger of warning at her.
She opened her mouth to speak, thought better of it, then slumped back angrily on the sofa and folded her arms across her chest.
‘Why was Mike never told about this?’
Whitlock asked, his eyes riveted on Bailey.
‘He's been through hell these past two years trying to come to terms with the loss of his family.
Had he known the truth it might have made his loss that bit more bearable.’
‘Bernard told us what happened and as he and Al-Makesh were the only two survivors of the attack we couldn't say anything without endangering his cover.’
‘You bastard,’ Sabrina snarled.
Bailey inhaled sharply and glanced at Kolchinsky, fully expecting him to reprimand her again.
Kolchinsky said nothing.
‘What did happen to them?’
Whitlock asked, breaking the tense silence.
‘I don't know the details,’ Bailey replied with a shrug.
‘But I do know they were killed in retaliation for the attack on the base camp.
That's all Bernard could find out from Al-Makesh.’
Whitlock bit his lip pensively then looked across at Kolchinsky.
‘When I asked you earlier where I fitted into the assignment you said that I'd find out soon enough.
There's more to this than just finding Mike before he gets to Bernard, isn't there?’
‘Yes,’ Kolchinsky replied bluntly then took another cigarette from the packet on the desk and lit it.
He indicated towards Bailey.
‘I'll let you explain.’
‘Very well,’ Bailey said.
‘Have either of you ever heard of Zimbala?’
‘Sure,’ Whitlock answered.
‘It's a small country in central Africa.
Borders Chad and Niger.’
‘You're unusually well informed,’ Bailey said with thinly veiled sarcasm.
‘I am African,’ Whitlock rejoined.
‘Born in Kenya, but educated in England.
That's where I learned about Zimbala.’
‘Then you'll also know that Zimbala has been a one-party state since it was granted independence by the French forty-five years ago.’
‘A dictatorship run by Alphonse Mobuto,’ Sabrina said.
‘Until his death last month,’ Bailey said.
‘That I didn't know,’ Whitlock said.
‘Me neither,’ Sabrina added.
‘It's hardly surprising.
His death received very limited coverage outside Zimbala.’
‘Who's running the country now?’
Whitlock asked.
‘His eldest son, Jamel.
He's due to arrive in New York tonight for an official three-day visit.’
‘So where does Bernard fit into this?’
Sabrina asked exasperatedly.
‘I'm coming to that.
It's Jamel Mobuto's intention to bring democracy to Zimbala.
That's caused a lot of resentment within certain sections of the country, especially amongst the rich who would stand to lose a great deal if Mobuto has his way.
A team of four assassins, made up from the now disbanded Security Police, have vowed to kill Mobuto while he's here in America.
It's a threat we've taken very seriously.
I told Bernard to infiltrate the team so that he can keep us posted on their movements.
He approached them with an offer to train them.
Naturally they accepted, knowing how invaluable his expertise would be to them.
They now trust him implicitly.
He'll tip us off when he knows where and when the hit is due to take place so that it can be stopped in time.
That's why Graham has to be found.
If he gets to Bernard before we know the details of the hit it'll leave us totally in the dark.
And if Mobuto was killed on American soil it would prove a severe embarrassment not only to us but to the President as well.
After all, it's not as if we haven't been forewarned.’
‘And I'm to babysit Mobuto?’
Whitlock concluded.
Bailey nodded.
‘You'll work with two of my men.
He's bringing half-a-dozen bodyguards with him but they're all amateurs, made up of officers from the Zimbalan army.
If anything does happen, it'll be up to the three of you to deal with it.’
‘You'll be in charge,’ Kolchinsky said, looking at Whitlock.
‘The three of them will be in charge,’ Bailey corrected him.
‘C.W. will be in overall charge,’ Kolchinsky retorted.
‘It's important to have one leader.
I've read the files on your men.
They may be the best bullet catchers you've got but they don't have C.W. ‘s experience.
And if you want to take the matter further I suggest you call the President.
The Secretary-General spoke to him earlier today and he agreed that C.W. should be in charge.’
‘I'll tell my men,’ Bailey said tersely.
‘I'll be in touch so that we can arrange for C.W. to meet your men before Mobuto arrives tonight,’ Kolchinsky said then picked up the transmitter on the desk and activated the door.
Bailey left the room and Kolchinsky closed the door behind him.
‘What a slimeball,’ Sabrina said, staring at the closed door.
Kolchinsky smiled.
‘He could have been sitting here instead of me.’
‘What do you mean?’ she asked.
‘You never knew my predecessor, Gronskin, did you?’
She shook her head.
‘He was before my time.’
‘Well, when he was deported back to Russia for spying the CIA suggested Bailey as a possible replacement to take over as the Colonel's number two.
The KGB put my name forward.
The Secretary-General initially wanted Bailey, which I suppose was understandable under the circumstances, but the Colonel threatened to resign if Bailey got the job.
As Bailey said, the two of them never saw eye to eye.
It would have been catastrophic if Bailey had come here.
So I got the job instead.’
‘I never knew that,’ Whitlock said.
‘I'm sure glad the Colonel put his foot down,’ Sabrina said, glancing at the door again.
Whitlock stood up and dug his hands into his pockets.
He crossed to the far wall then turned to look at Kolchinsky.
‘I was at university with Jamel Mobuto.’
‘Why didn't you say something when Bailey was here?’
‘Because we didn't get on,’ Whitlock replied.
‘Why not?’
Kolchinsky asked.
Whitlock sighed deeply then returned to the sofa and sat down.
‘He'd never set foot outside Zimbala before he came to Oxford.
It must have been a bit of a culture shock for him.
But instead of trying to adapt to the British way of life he rebelled against it and reverted to his African heritage.
He wore African clothes, his room was an African shrine and he made no attempt to befriend any of the British students.
He became a pariah although he did have an avid following amongst some of the more radical left-wing students who regarded him as something of a guru.’
‘Was he a Communist?’
Kolchinsky asked.
‘No, strangely enough.
He was just very pro-African and Africa's particular way of life.
He had a younger brother who went to Oxford as well and he did become a Communist.
But that was after I'd gone.
I don't know anything about him.’
‘His name's Remy,’ Kolchinsky said and tapped the dossier on the desk.
‘It's all in here.
You'll both get copies of it.’
‘You still haven't said why you and Mobuto didn't get on,’ Sabrina said.
‘I was born in Kenya but educated in England.
To him, I was little more than a traitor.
I'd sold out my race.
And let's face it, I am more British than I am Kenyan.
That's what he couldn't accept.
So we just kept out of each other 's way.’
‘Why did he stay if he hated it so much?’
Sabrina asked.
‘Because his father had sent him.
If he'd gone back to Zimbala it would have brought disgrace on the family.
Africans take failure far more seriously than you do here in the West.’
Whitlock dismissed the subject with a curt flick of his hand.
‘Anyway, that was a long time ago.
I certainly don't hold any grudges now.’
‘Let's hope Mobuto feels the same way,’ Kolchinsky said.
‘Does he know I'm going to be babysitting him when he gets to New York?’
Kolchinsky nodded.
‘Bailey's already briefed him on the telephone but he won't know you're in charge of the operation until he gets here.
You'll have to break that to him yourself.’
‘I look forward to it,’ Whitlock said with a faint smile.
Kolchinsky handed them each a dossier which contained details of their particular assignment (to be destroyed after reading) and, in Sabrina's case, an airline ticket, maps of Beirut, written confirmation of her hotel booking, the name of her contact and a sum of money in Lebanese pounds.
She glanced at her watch and immediately got to her feet.
‘My flight leaves at four thirty this afternoon,’ she said.
‘I'd better get going.
Send the Colonel my best wishes when you see him again, Sergei.’
‘I will,’ Kolchinsky replied and activated the door for her.
‘And Sabrina?’
She paused in the doorway to look round at him.
‘Bring Michael back before he gets himself into any more trouble.’
She nodded grimly then left the room.
Kolchinsky closed the door again.
‘The Colonel might not be coming back.
The Secretary-General's waiting for the doctor's report before coming to a decision.’
‘He was due to retire at the end of the year anyway.
Perhaps it's for the best if he did take an early retirement.’
‘Try telling that to the Colonel.
It's not as if he's taking voluntary retirement.
It's been forced on him by his doctor.
So you can be sure he'll want to see out his time here, if only to prove a point to his doctor.’
‘And possibly kill himself in the process.’
Kolchinsky reached for his cigarettes and lit one.
‘That's why the Secretary-General's delaying his decision.
He'll give the Colonel every chance to prove that he's fit enough to return to work.’
‘And if not, I'll leave Strike Force Three and join you here.’
‘You don't sound very enthusiastic about it,’ Kolchinsky said.
‘I'm not.
Stuck behind a desk all day isn't my idea of  fun, Sergei.’
Whitlock picked up the dossier.
‘Let me out, will you?’
‘The Colonel said you were over the moon when he broke the news to you.’
‘How did you expect me to react?
Carmen was there.’
Whitlock walked to the door and looked back at Kolchinsky.
‘Don't worry, I won't let anyone down.
Especially not her.’
THREE
Remy Mobuto had always lived in his brother's shadow.
He had known from an early age that Jamel, as the older brother, would take over as leader of Zimbala once their father died.
That had never bothered him.
He had never had any aspirations to enter politics.
When he followed Jamel to Oxford he immediately joined the Communist Party, more as an act of rebellion than anything else.
His father's response was not only to stop sending him money but also to bar him from returning to Zimbala until he renounced his Socialist beliefs.
He refused to comply and left Oxford after the first year to join the Guardian where he remained for seven years before taking up a post as an investigative journalist with a left-wing French newspaper.
By then he had become an outspoken critic of the numerous dictators in Africa, especially his father.
His father disowned him publicly and said he would never be allowed back to Zimbala in his lifetime.
He returned for his father's funeral, the first time he'd been back to Zimbala in seventeen years, and Jamel was able to persuade him to stay on as the new editor of the country's leading daily newspaper,La Voix .
Remy had only been in charge for a month and already he had a major scoop on his hands.
It concerned the plot to overthrow his brother and form a new dictatorship; but he had discovered another side to the story, a sinister angle that would make international headlines if it were ever made public.
But before he could do that, or tell Jamel, he needed proof to back up those allegations.
And he was about to get it…
He drove down the main street of Habane, the capital of Zimbala, and turned into the basement carpark where he had arranged to meet his informant.
There were only a couple of cars there at that time of the evening.
He glanced at his watch.
Eight fifty-seven.
He had told his informant to meet him at nine o'clock.
He pulled into the pre-arranged space, climbed out of the car, then took a pack of cigarettes from his jacket pocket and lit one.
He looked around him slowly.
The silence was eerie.
He took a long drag on the cigarette and looked at his watch again.
Eight fifty-eight.
He cursed his anxiety.
There was no reason for it.
But still the uncertainty lingered.
He looked round again, this time taking more notice of his surroundings.
Then he saw it: his informant's car, a blue Fiat.
It was parked next to the wall and almost hidden from view by the red Studebaker beside it.
He exhaled sharply and managed a faint smile.
Typical of his informant to take such precautions.
He ground his cigarette underfoot and walked slowly towards the Fiat.
He could see his informant behind the wheel.
Why hadn't he shown himself?
Mobuto dismissed the question; at least he was there.
He reached the Fiat and leaned over to peer through the driver's window.
The man's throat had been cut from ear to ear, soaking his shirt and trousers in blood.
Mobuto recoiled in horror, stumbling back painfully into the Studebaker's wing mirror.
He felt his stomach heave and he retched against the wall.
He remained doubled over for several seconds before slowly straightening up and wiping the sweat from his forehead.
Then he heard a sound behind him.
He turned, his eyes wide with fear.
Two men stood behind the Studebaker.
Both were dressed in blue overalls.
One had blood on his sleeve.
The killer?
He was about to speak when he noticed a movement out of the corner of his eye.
He was still turning when the cosh struck him behind the ear.
Then nothing.
Zimbala's main prison, La Tambier, was less than ten minutes' drive from the centre of Habane.
It took its name from the district in which it was located.
It had been built when Alphonse Mobuto first came to power and quickly became known throughout the country as La Boucherie , the Butcher's Shop, because of the number of anti-government dissidents who were tortured then murdered there by the feared and hated Security Police.
Jamel Mobuto's first two decrees on taking office had been to free all political prisoners being held there and the immediate dismantling of the Security Police.
Now, ironically, its most notorious prisoner was Le Boucher , Tito Ngune, the head of the  Security Police for the last twenty-three years.
There had been cries for his public execution but Jamel Mobuto had made it quite clear that Ngune would be tried and, if found guilty, sentenced to life imprisonment.
He refused to continue the legacy of executions which had been symptomatic of his father's regime.
Ngune lay on the single mattress in the corner of his cell.
He was a stocky fifty-eight-year-old with grey hair and a small goatee beard which looked as if it had been stuck on to his chin with glue.
His face and body were a mass of bruises after he had been attacked at his home by a forty-strong mob who were preparing to lynch him in the remains of his once beautiful garden when the military had arrived and bundled him into the back of a police van and brought him to La Tambier.
He sat up gingerly and looked slowly around the cell.
All those years of unswerving loyalty to Alphonse Mobuto and this was all it had brought him.
Mobuto had always had one weakness, his family.
Although he publicly renounced Remy and repealed the law making Jamel his natural successor, he had always refused to allow Ngune's men to touch them.
But, unknown to Mobuto, Ngune had tried on three different occasions to have Jamel killed.
Each attempt had ended in failure.
He certainly had guts, Ngune had to give him that.
Anyone else who had dared to criticize either Mobuto or his Government was immediately arrested and taken to La Tambier or to the now abandoned Branco prison in Kondese, the second-largest city situated in the south of the country.
None of them ever left.
A jackhammer started up somewhere beyond the  prison walls.
It had become a familiar sound over the last couple of days.
At first it had been an irritation but now he had grown strangely accustomed to it — a break from the monotonous silence that filled the prison.
He had wondered what they were doing out there.
Digging up the road?
Or tearing down part of the prison?
It was certainly feasible under Jamel Mobuto's new liberal leadership.
Not that it mattered.
It was all academic to him now.
But it still interested him, if only to put his mind at rest.
He reminded himself to ask one of the guards when they brought him his next meal…
Michael Sibele had known for the last two days why the gang of workmen was busy outside the main gates: repairing a burst mains pipe.
He had been the guard on duty at the gate for the last week.
It was his last day.
Tomorrow he would return to his duties inside the prison — with mixed feelings.
He had enjoyed the workmen's company but he would also be grateful to get away from the noise of the machines, especially the incessant throbbing of the jackhammers.
The workmen had offered him ear plugs but his commanding officer had forbidden him to wear them.
So he just had to put up with the noise.
Well, only a few hours to go…
One of the workmen broke away from the group and approached him.
Sibele knew him only as Johnny.
His real name was Thomas Massenga, once Ngune's right-hand man, who had been on the run since Jamel Mobuto came to power.
It was only when he got closer that Sibele saw the blood on the sleeve of his blue overall.
Massenga pulled a  Mini-Uzi from inside his overall and shot Sibele at point-blank range.
The bulldozer which had stood dormant for the past two days coughed into life and rumbled towards the prison gates.
Two guards, who had been alerted by the gunfire, ran towards the gates.
Both were armed with FN FAL semi-automatic rifles.
Massenga shot them before they could fire at the bulldozer.
It smashed through the gates, tearing them off their hinges as though they were made of plastic.
Massenga gestured to the other six men who immediately followed him into the prison compound, each carrying a Mini-Uzi.
The skeleton staff were no match for Massenga and his team of ex-Security policemen.
The fighting was over within a minute and they were able to make their way down to the cells.
The two guards outside Ngune's cell threw down their weapons when challenged by Massenga.
They had no option.
Massenga took the keys from one of them and unlocked Ngune's cell door.
He hurried over to where Ngune lay and crouched anxiously beside him, horrified at the sight of Ngune's discoloured, swollen face.
Immediately he ordered two of his men to carry Ngune then locked the two terrified guards in an adjoining cell.
Discarding the keys, he then led the way back to the front of the prison.
He glanced at his watch.
They had made good time.
Although the telephone wires had been cut minutes before the assault he knew the authorities would still have been alerted and were almost certainly on their way to the prison at that very moment.
A black van reversed through the shattered remains  of the main gate and the back doors were thrown open.
Ngune was helped into the back of the van and placed gently on a palliasse with his head resting on a pillow.
Massenga closed the doors then climbed into the cab beside the driver who engaged the gears and pulled out into the road.
The plan was to change vehicles on the outskirts of Habane then continue on to Kondese where hundreds of men, mostly ex-Security policemen loyal to Ngune, were waiting to launch a crushing offensive against Jamel Mobuto's inept, and disorganized, government troops, many of whom had only joined up when the new regime was instated.
And with a team of assassins awaiting Jamel Mobuto's arrival in America, it would only be a question of days before Tito Ngune was inaugurated as the new President of Zimbala.
It was a plan that couldn't fail.
The New York Police Department, which was responsible for security at John F. Kennedy Airport, had drafted in fifty men for the arrival of Jamel Mobuto's delegation in America.
Fifteen snipers, each with M16 rifles (and infra-red night scopes), were positioned at strategic points overlooking the runway while another fifteen, in plainclothes, mingled freely with the crowds inside the terminal building itself.
A section of runway had been cordoned off that afternoon by the remaining twenty policemen who had strict orders not to allow anyone through without an official pass.
The authorities were determined not to take any chances, not with so much at stake.
Whitlock had driven to the airport a couple of hours  before the delegation was due to arrive to ensure that all the security measures had been put into operation.
He had been satisfied with the arrangements.
He glanced at his watch.
The two hours were almost up and, according to air-traffic control, the presidential plane would land on schedule.
He looked around.
To his left were three NYPD police cars, parked bumper to bumper, and behind them a human chain of police officers, all armed with handguns and rifles.
To his right were the four black limousines that would be used to transport the Zimbalan delegation around New York.
The opaque dark windows, like the chassis, were bulletproof, and each of the drivers could activate a row of razor-sharp spikes secreted on the undercarriage if any attempt was made to overturn the car.
Every eventuality had to be covered.
The official welcoming party had congregated in front of the limousines, talking amongst themselves.
The Zimbalan mission was headed by their newly appointed ambassador to the UN and the White House's Chief of Protocol was the official representative from the American administration.
Whitlock's eyes flickered to the two sombre-suited men standing apart from the others, Paul Brett and Jack Rogers.
Bailey's men.
Both had been presidential bodyguards with the Reagan administration but neither of them had ever had to draw his gun in anger.
Whitlock had spent most of the afternoon with them and he'd come away with the distinct impression that they held him in little regard.
Although they never said it, he knew their bitterness stemmed from the fact that  he would be in charge of the operation.
They would be taking orders from someone outside the CIA.
Brett suddenly glanced across at him.
His face remained expressionless.
Rogers said something and they both laughed.
Whitlock stared back at Brett.
The hell he'd be intimidated by one of Bailey's flunkeys.
Brett looked away.
Whitlock suddenly noticed that a member of the Zimbalan mission had been watching them.
She was an attractive, light-skinned African in her late twenties in a blue suit and white blouse.
The translator.
The official languages of Zimbala were Swahili and French; and several of the Zimbalan delegates didn't speak English.
He smiled at her.
She smiled back then looked away quickly as if she had been caught doing something wrong.
He suddenly thought of Rosie.
He'd been so busy that afternoon that he'd completely forgotten to call her.
He felt a sense of guilt but at the same time knew he could never have spoken to her anyway.
He made a mental note to call her and arrange a time to meet, away from her parents.
Someone called out, breaking his train of thought.
The presidential plane was making its final descent.
He immediately ordered the policemen to take up their designated positions on the runway then crossed to where Brett and Rogers were standing.
They glanced at him but said nothing.
The white Gulfstream One executed a perfect landing but it was only when it taxied towards them that Whitlock saw the blue, red and white Zimbalan flag painted on the side of the fuselage with the words ‘Air Zimbala’ above it in black lettering.
It was  obvious that the plane had been repainted before its journey and Whitlock suddenly wondered if it had been done to erase the memories of the previous regime.
He let the thought pass as the plane came to a halt less than twenty yards away from the limousines.
The hatch opened and a set of steps was driven up to it.
The Chief of Protocol led the way to the foot of the steps, waiting for Mobuto to appear.
The first man to emerge had to duck through the opening.
Whitlock judged him to be at least six foot six.
He looked around him slowly then disappeared back inside the aircraft.
He reappeared a moment later and Whitlock immediately recognized Mobuto when he emerged behind the bodyguard.
He was a tall, handsome man who had an air of confidence about him.
He was dressed in an expensive grey Dior suit and wore dark glasses.
It was hard to believe he was forty-two years old.
He looked ten years younger.
He removed the glasses on reaching the tarmac and he shook the Chief of Protocol's extended hand.
Rogers and Brett immediately flanked him at the foot of the steps and walked with him as he shook hands with each member of the Zimbalan mission in turn.
His grip lingered on the translator's hand and he smiled faintly at her before turning back to the Chief of Protocol who was standing behind him.
It was then that he noticed Whitlock standing discreetly in the background.
He told Brett and Rogers to hold back then crossed to where Whitlock stood and held out a hand of greeting.
‘It's been a long time, Clarence,’ Mobuto said in  his faultless English.
Whitlock bit back his anger.
He had never forgiven his parents for christening him Clarence Wilkins.
‘Over twenty years,’ Whitlock replied, gripping the extended hand.
‘You look well, Jamel.’
Mobuto inhaled sharply and glanced at the massive bodyguard who was hovering in the background.
He turned back to Whitlock.
‘You call me President Mobuto in front of my people!’
‘And you call me C.W. in front of mine,’ Whitlock retorted, holding Mobuto's stare.
Mobuto smiled coldly.
‘You haven't changed a bit.
Still as insolent as ever.’
‘And you're still as arrogant as ever.’
Whitlock looked past Mobuto and gestured for Brett and Rogers to approach them.
He introduced them to Mobuto then went on to explain that one of them would always be at his side for the duration of his visit.
‘And you?’
Mobuto asked once Whitlock had finished speaking.
‘I'm in charge of security.
Brett and Rogers report directly to me.
As do your bodyguards.’
‘Very well,’ Mobuto replied after a moment's thought then moved away with the Chief of Protocol, heading towards one of the limousines.
‘Brett, you're taking first shift, aren't you?’
Brett nodded.
‘Rogers, you'll relieve him tomorrow at seven a.m.’
‘Fine,’ was all Rogers said.
Whitlock dismissed Rogers then he and Brett hurried after Mobuto.
Brett went to the lead limousine and climbed in beside the driver.
Whitlock caught up with  Mobuto but remained discreetly in the background while he finished talking to the Chief of Protocol.
Mobuto spoke briefly to the Zimbalan ambassador in Swahili then beckoned the tall bodyguard towards him.
He introduced him to Whitlock as Masala, his personal bodyguard, then told Masala that he and the other three Zimbalan bodyguards were to liaise directly with Whitlock.
‘President Mobuto and I will be in the second car,’ Whitlock said to Masala.
‘You ride up front in the third.
Spread your men amongst the other two cars.’
Masala nodded then went off to carry out Whitlock's instructions.
Mobuto climbed into the back of the limousine.
The Zimbalan ambassador got in beside him and the driver closed the door behind them.
Whitlock got into the passenger seat and the driver immediately started the engine.
Whitlock looked round at Mobuto.
‘I'm going to seal off the back of the car with a sheet of soundproof glass.
Not only is it bulletproof but it will also give you privacy to speak to the ambassador.
There's a private telephone in the compartment in front of you if you need to make any outside calls.
And if you need us, just dial zero.’
Mobuto nodded.
Whitlock activated the switch on the dashboard and the glass slid into place, sealing off the back and front seats of the car.
He sat back and exhaled deeply.
The driver glanced at him but sensed that Whitlock wasn't in the mood to talk.
He switched on the radio, found a music station and followed the first limousine out of the airport onto the Grand Central Parkway, heading towards Manhattan.
The convoy, led by a police car and two police motorcycles, made its way through Long Island City, across the Queensboro Bridge into Manhattan then down First Avenue to the United Nations Plaza, the hotel where the Zimbalan delegation would stay for the duration of their three-day visit to New York.
It was situated close to the United Nations headquarters as well as being only three blocks away from the African American Institute which Mobuto had requested to see at some point during his visit.
And with Mobuto due to address the United Nations' General Assembly, the locale couldn't have been better.
The convoy drew to a halt in front of the hotel; Whitlock jumped out of the limousine and looked around him slowly.
The press, who had been alerted by an anonymous call to Reuters the previous day by one of the assassins, were out in force, waiting and hoping to get an exclusive of an assassination, or at least an attempted assassination, for the morning papers.
Whitlock shouted at the two policemen on the motorcycles to get the photographers back a few feet to give Mobuto a chance to get out of the limousine.
They immediately set about the task of pushing the jostling photographers away from the limousine.
Brett and Masala flanked the back door and the other three bodyguards took up positions on the other side of the car, facing the photographers.
Satisfied, Whitlock nodded to Masala who opened the back door.
Mobuto climbed out slowly and turned to wave at the waiting photographers.
Flashbulbs popped incessantly  and Whitlock found himself struggling to focus on the sea of cameras, his eyes darting about in search of anything untoward.
Suddenly one of the Zimbalan bodyguards shouted a warning and lunged at the photographers.
Whitlock knocked Mobuto to the ground in the split-second before a bullet smashed into the wall behind them.
The photographers scattered in panic as the bodyguard made a grab for the gunman.
A second shot rang out and the bodyguard stumbled back, clutching his stomach.
The other two Zimbalan bodyguards immediately drew their snub-nosed Smith & Wesson.38s and sprinted after the fleeing gunman.
The getaway driver, in a blue Ford, laid down a burst of suppressing fire, forcing the bodyguards to dive for cover.
By the time they had got to their feet the gunman had jumped through the open passenger door and the wheels shrieked in protest as the car sped away from the hotel.
Whitlock mounted one of the police motorcycles, kick-started it, then slewed it violently in an ungainly one-hundred-and-eighty-degree turn and took off after the getaway car.
He unhooked the radio and called for backup, giving a description of the car and its registration number.
The Ford swung sharply into East 34th Street, mounted the kerb, and narrowly missed a couple of teenagers waiting to cross the road.
The driver managed to regain control and turned into Second Avenue.
Suddenly he felt the car beginning to skid and in his panic trod on the brakes.
The wheels locked and the car careered across the road, clipping the side of an  oncoming Greyhound bus.
The car overturned and ploughed into the side of a stationary delivery van.
The driver was dead, his chest crushed by the steering wheel.
The gunman managed to unbuckle his safety belt and struggled to push open the passenger door.
Eager hands reached out to help him as he eased himself out of the car.
He wiped the blood from a gash on his forehead then waved the Walther P5 threateningly at the growing crowd of onlookers.
They immediately stepped back, anxious not to alarm him.
He fired blindly at Whitlock as he turned into Second Avenue.
Whitlock lost control of the motorcycle and fell heavily onto the road.
The gunman looked around him wildly and the crowd parted as he darted up a narrow alleyway.
Whitlock pulled himself to his feet and winced as a sharp pain shot through his left leg.
He looked down at it.
His trousers were ripped and the blood seeped down his leg from the gash inches above his knee.
It hurt like hell but he was damned if he was going to let the gunman escape.
He drew his Browning Mk2 and went after the gunman.
Ignoring the pain that shot through his leg with every step, he reached the end of the alleyway.
It forked off in two directions.
And the gunman was nowhere to be seen.
He cursed softly, knowing he'd lost him.
A bullet cracked inches above his head and he flung himself behind a row of metal dustbins, the Browning clenched tightly in his hand.
The shot had come from the left fork.
He couldn't see the gunman but at least he knew where he was.
He could wait.
The gunman fired again but the bullet was well off target.
He was  panicking; and panic invariably leads to mistakes.
He suddenly darted out from behind a metal ladder and Whitlock aimed at his legs.
He needed him alive.
A police car emerged from the other alleyway and screeched to a halt ten yards in front of Whitlock, blocking his shot.
Whitlock cursed angrily and got to his feet.
The policeman got out of the car, his Colt Python drawn.
He shouted to Whitlock to drop his weapon.
Whitlock tried to explain but the policeman's grip tightened on the revolver and he repeated the order.
Whitlock snarled angrily and tossed the Browning onto the ground.
The policeman kicked it away and gestured for Whitlock to approach the police car.
‘I want ten fingers on the hood.
Do it!’
‘I'm working with you guys, for Christ's sake!’
Whitlock snarled in exasperation.
‘Sure, now put those fingers on the hood.’
‘My name's Whitlock, check with your superior.
I'm head of the Zimbalan President's security team.’
The policeman waited until Whitlock had put his hands on the police car then used his foot to spread his legs.
‘I was told to apprehend an armed black suspect in this alley.
I don't see another one, do you?’
‘That's because you've let him get away,’ Whitlock snarled but the policeman snapped at him to face the front when he tried to look round.
The policeman frisked him then reached for his handcuffs.
Whitlock, sensing his moment, swung round and felled him with one punch.
He tossed the Colt Python onto the front seat then locked the keys inside the police car.
Retrieving his Browning he  hurried over to where he had last seen the gunman.
He had gone.
Then he heard a noise, a metal bin being knocked over.
He followed the sound and was just in time to see the gunman climbing a wire fence at the end of an adjoining alleyway.
Whitlock purposely fired wide.
It had the desired effect — the gunman tumbled over the top of the fence, landing painfully on his back.
Whitlock scrambled to his feet but by the time he reached the fence the gunman had already crossed the twenty-yard clearing and disappeared into a derelict warehouse.
Whitlock clambered over the fence and landed nimbly on his feet.
He straightened up then noticed the gunman's Walther P5 lying at the edge of the clearing.
He must have lost it when he fell to the ground.
Whitlock doubted he would have another gun but he still approached the warehouse with professional caution.
He reached the open doors and peered in.
It took his eyes a few seconds to get accustomed to the gloom then he darted inside and ducked down behind a rusty skip close to the door.
He looked around slowly then carefully scanned the catwalk that criss-crossed the warehouse above him.
No sign of the gunman.
He slipped out from behind the skip and moved slowly across the concrete floor, the Browning gripped tightly in his hand, his eyes continually darting about him.
He reached the other side of the cavernous room and paused to wipe the sweat from his eyes.
Where the hell was he?
A shower of dust sprinkled his face but before he could react the gunman leaped onto him from a ledge on the wall.
They both fell heavily to the ground and  the Browning went spinning from Whitlock's hand.
The man lashed out with a rusted chain but Whitlock managed to roll clear before it struck the ground where he had been lying.
Whitlock kicked out at the man, catching him on the leg so that he overbalanced and fell against the wall.
The chain clattered noisily to the ground.
Whitlock sprung to his feet and caught him on the side of the head with a stinging haymaker then followed up with two brutal body punches that dropped him to his knees.
The man clutched his stomach in agony then noticed the fallen Browning out of the corner of his eye.
He grabbed it and turned on Whitlock who managed to deflect it before he fired.
They struggled for possession of the gun.
It slipped from the gunman's hand, landing at his feet.
Whitlock shoved him back onto a tarpaulin in the corner of the warehouse and scooped up the Browning.
He levelled it at the gunman then let his hand drop to his side.
The man had been impaled on the rusted spikes of a security gate that had been discarded underneath the tarpaulin.
Whitlock swallowed back the bile in his throat and crossed to where the gunman lay, his shirt soaked in blood.
He felt for a pulse then, letting the gunman's arm drop, he holstered the Browning before walking back slowly towards the doors.
As he reached them he heard the first of the police sirens in the distance.
He dusted off a box and sat down to wait for them.
Kolchinsky was waiting in the foyer when Whitlock got back to the hotel.
‘How's the leg?’ were Kolchinsky's first words.
‘O K,’ Whitlock replied with a grim smile.
‘It didn't need stitches.
But I got a tetanus jab as a precaution.
Thank for clearing everything for me with the NYPD.
I had visions of being stuck in a cell all night.’
Kolchinsky patted Whitlock on the shoulder.
‘Come on, Mobuto's waiting to see you.’
‘How is he?’
‘Remarkably well under the circumstances,’ Kolchinsky replied as they walked to the lift.
‘You wouldn't believe someone had just tried to kill him.
He's acting like it never happened.’
‘Acting being the operative word,’ Whitlock retorted as the lift door parted.
‘You really don't like him, do you?’
‘As a person, no.
But he's obviously genuine about bringing democracy to Zimbala.
And that makes all this worthwhile.’
They rode the lift to the thirtieth floor and were immediately challenged by a uniformed policeman as they stepped out.
They both held up their passes and were allowed through.
The entire floor had been booked by the Zimbalan delegation although only ten rooms were being used.
It was a security measure.
Another policeman challenged them outside Mobuto's suite and again they had to produce their passes.
Kolchinsky knocked on the door.
It was opened on the chain by Masala who immediately unlocked it to allow them in.
They were ushered into the lounge then Masala discreetly withdrew, closing the door behind him.
Mobuto was alone.
He was seated on the sofa sifting through a batch of papers he had taken from his  attache case.
He looked up, removed his reading glasses, then got to his feet and indicated the second sofa.
Kolchinsky sat down and asked if Mobuto minded if he smoked.
‘Please, feel free,’ Mobuto replied then turned to Whitlock.
‘You saved my life tonight.
Thank you.
I believe you were injured while chasing the gunman.
Nothing serious, I hope?’
Whitlock shook his head.
‘I cut my leg when I fell off the motorbike.
It's nothing.
I'm sorry about your man.
He's the one who really saved your life.’
‘He died without ever regaining consciousness.
At least he was spared the pain.’
Mobuto folded the glasses and placed them on the coffee table in the centre of the room.
‘Can I offer either of you a drink?’
‘Nothing for me,’ Kolchinsky replied, shaking his head.
‘Clarence?’
‘Nothing, thank you.’
Whitlock sat down beside Kolchinsky.
‘Where's Brett?’
‘He's next door,’ Mobuto replied indifferently.
‘And Masala's in the other room.
You've got no protection —‘
‘I've got half the New York police force in the corridor and bodyguards in every adjoining room,’ Mobuto cut in sharply.
‘I feel like a prisoner.’
‘It's important that you always have at least one bodyguard in the room with you at all times,’ Whitlock countered.
‘Even when I'm sleeping?’
‘Even when you're sleeping,’ Whitlock shot back.
‘These assassins are obviously prepared to sacrifice  their own lives to kill you.
That means they'll go to any lengths to get you.’
‘What exactly are you implying?’
‘What I'm saying is that even in this room you're not safe.
They could come through the window —‘
‘We're thirty floors up, for God sake,’ Mobuto cut in then chuckled softly to himself.
‘I think you're being a little melodramatic.’
‘No, sir, he's not,’ Kolchinsky said sternly.
‘C.W. ‘s right.
You must always have at least one bodyguard with you at all times.
Tonight proved that.’
Mobuto sat down opposite them and sighed deeply.
‘Very well.
You are the experts.’
Whitlock got to his feet.
‘Which room's Brett in?’
Mobuto pointed to his left.
‘He's next door.’
Whitlock left the suite and knocked on the adjoining door.
He grabbed Brett the moment he opened the door and slammed him up against the wall.
‘You're supposed to be next door, not sitting here on your arse watching a ball game.’
Brett broke free from Whitlock's grip and stared angrily at him.
‘The President told me to go.
What the hell was I supposed to do?’
‘You were supposed to explain to him that it's your job to stay with him.
You don't tell him his job and he doesn't tell you yours.
You're supposed to be a professional.
Start acting like one.’
Brett glared furiously at Whitlock then slipped on his shoulder holster and scooped up his jacket before leaving the room.
Whitlock followed him into Mobuto's suite.
Brett pulled up a chair and sat discreetly in the corner.
‘The President's just received a telephone call from Zimbala,’ Kolchinsky said.
‘His brother's been kidnapped.’
‘What happened?’
Whitlock replied, looking at Mobuto.
‘He went to meet an informer.
An hour later the newspaper's deputy editor received an anonymous call to say that Remy had been abducted by Ngune's men.
That's all the caller would say.’
Mobuto glanced at Whitlock.
‘I presume you have been briefed about the Ngune breakout?’
‘Yes, sir, I have,’ Whitlock replied.
‘Has Ngune got the backing to attempt a coup d'état ?’
‘He's got men and money,’ Mobuto answered matter-of-factly.
‘The men are his ex-Security Policemen.
The money comes from the wealthy Moslem community in the south of the country.
Many of them built up vast fortunes under my father's regime, illegal fortunes, I hasten to add.
They know that if I do bring a new democratic freedom to my country then it'll mean the confiscation of those fortunes.
And as you know, greed knows no bounds.
They'll go to any lengths to reinstate a dictatorship that will protect them, just as my father's regime did for forty-five years.
I'm the one obstacle in their way.
The people look to me as a new Messiah.
I won't let them down.’
‘One thing puzzles me,’ Whitlock said at length.
‘Your father repealed the law making you his natural successor once he realized you'd never follow in his footsteps.
So how did you manage to wrestle power from the government after his death?’
‘My father was the government.
He made the  decisions, he passed the laws.
His ministers were just yes-men, puppets.
So, when he died, the puppets had no-one to pull their strings anymore.
They panicked.
And I used that panic to my benefit.
But I had to act fast.
Ngune was my biggest threat.
He was the one man my father trusted, really trusted.
Fortunately for the country, the police and the Security Police had never got on.
And with the police and most of the armed forces behind me, I was able to stop Ngune from seizing power.
Unfortunately I underestimated the strength of his support.
But I'm determined not to cut short my visit here.
That would just play straight into his hands.
It would make the people think I was panicking.
And that could lose me support.’
Mobuto got to his feet and moved to the sideboard to pour himself a bourbon.
‘Well, gentlemen, if you'll excuse me, I've got some work to finish before I go to bed.’
‘Of course,’ Kolchinsky said, getting to his feet.
Whitlock crossed to where Brett was sitting.
‘Don't let him out of your sight,’ he said softly.
‘I won't,’ Brett replied tersely.
Whitlock said good night to Mobuto then followed Kolchinsky out into the corridor.
‘I wish we could have used our own people to babysit Mobuto.
I'd have felt a lot happier.’
Kolchinsky nodded grimly.
‘I know what you mean.
But we're stuck with Bailey's men, I'm afraid.
There's nothing I can do about it.’
‘I know,’ Whitlock replied and pushed the button for the lift.
‘I'm going to drop by the hospital to update the Colonel on today's developments.
Fancy coming?’
Whitlock shrugged.
‘Why not?
Carmen won't be home yet.
She works late Tuesdays.’
He looked at his watch.
‘But aren't visiting hours over?’
‘The Secretary-General had a word with the hospital's administrator who reluctantly agreed to make an exception in the Colonel's case and waive the normal visiting hours.
It was one of the conditions the Colonel laid down if he was to remain in hospital.’
Whitlock shot Kolchinsky a knowing look then ushered him into the lift.
Kolchinsky drove the short distance to the Bellevue Hospital, conveniently situated less than two miles away from both the hotel and the United Nations building.
The receptionist directed them to a private ward on the third floor.
Kolchinsky knocked lightly.
‘Come in,’ Philpott called out.
Kolchinsky opened the door and entered.
Philpott was sitting up in bed, his face hidden behind a copy of the New York Times .
‘Just put them by the bed.
I'll take them later,’ Philpott muttered gruffly from behind the newspaper.
‘It's me, Malcolm,’ Kolchinsky announced.
Philpott lowered the newspaper and gave them a wry smile.
‘I'm sorry, I thought it was another of those damn nurses.
They've been coming and going all day.’
He glanced at Whitlock.
‘I see he managed to drag you along as well.’
Whitlock smiled and pulled up a chair.
‘How are you feeling, sir?’
‘A little weak, but otherwise fine.’
Kolchinsky sat down on the second chair and handed Philpott a brown packet.
‘It's from the deli on 44th Street.’
Philpott opened the packet and looked inside.
‘Grapes!
I was hoping it might have been some tobacco.
The doctor confiscated mine.’
He put the packet on the bedside table and picked up his empty pipe.
‘I'm dying for a smoke.
C.W. —‘
‘I'm not fetching you any tobacco,’ Whitlock cut in quickly.
‘Get better first, then you can smoke your pipe again.’
‘I am better.
I should have discharged myself this morning.’
Philpott gave a resigned sigh.
‘Any news of Mike?’
Kolchinsky explained the day's events, culminating in the attempted assassination of Jamel Mobuto.
‘Good God,’ Philpott muttered when Kolchinsky had finished talking.
He looked at Whitlock.
‘Are you alright?’
‘I cut my leg when I fell off the motorbike.
It's nothing serious.
But my suit's a total write-off.
It'll break my tailor's heart.’
‘At least you're alright.
Any news on the assassin and his accomplice?’
‘Nothing yet,’ Kolchinsky replied.
‘They weren't carrying any ID but they're almost certainly Zimbalan.
Probably ex-Security policemen.
I've had their photographs and prints faxed through to the police in Habane.
Hopefully they'll have come up with something by tomorrow.’
‘And what was that you said earlier about Bernard.
He's CIA?’
Kolchinsky nodded then opened the attache case.
He handed his photostat copy of Bailey's file to Philpott.
‘It's all in there.
I'll leave it with you tonight.
It certainly makes interesting reading.’
‘I bet it does,’ Philpott hissed.
‘Be careful of Bailey, Sergei.
Tell him as little as possible.
And don't trust him an inch.’
‘I think we all realized that when we met him,’ Kolchinsky said, glancing at Whitlock.
‘And as for those two bullet-catchers…’
Whitlock trailed off with a shake of his head.
‘What about them?’
Philpott asked.
‘Let's just say I wouldn't want them protecting me,’ Whitlock replied.
‘As I said to Sergei back at the hotel, I only wish we could have used our own people to babysit Mobuto.
I'd have slept better.’
‘I did try, C.W.,’ Philpott said with an apologetic shrug.
‘I wanted to bring in Strike Force Seven as his personal bodyguard team.
That would have left you free to work with Sabrina in Beirut.
But the President wanted this to be a joint operation and Bailey managed to convince him to use CIA men as bodyguards.
There was nothing I could do.
At least the President saw enough sense to agree to my request to put you in charge of the unit.
I know you won't let me down, C.W. Just keep an eye on Bailey's goons.
If President Mobuto had been killed tonight we'd have been crucified.’
‘We've still got three days to go, sir.
They're sure to try again.’
‘You can count on it.
And what happened to this warning Bernard was supposed to have passed on to Bailey?’
‘I spoke to Bailey after the attempt on the President's life,’ Kolchinsky said.
‘He claims Bernard never contacted him.
His theory is that the two men were either freelance or else they decided to try and kill the President by themselves without telling the others.’
‘It just doesn't ring true, does it?’
Whitlock said.
‘Of course it doesn't,’ Philpott snapped tersely.
‘But we're dealing with Bailey, remember?’
Kolchinsky nodded then rubbed his eyes wearily.
‘Well, there's nothing more we can do tonight.
And I'm shattered.
It's been some day.’
Whitlock got to his feet.
‘Only three to go.
Can you drop me off at the apartment on your way home, Sergei?
If I get the subway I'll probably fall asleep and end up at Washington Heights.’
Kolchinsky patted Whitlock's shoulder.
‘Of course.
Come on.’
Philpott watched them leave then stared at the folder Kolchinsky had left with him.
He knew Bailey was up to something, but what?
The thought lingered as he opened the folder and started to read its contents.
FOUR
Sabrina paused outside the door, knocked, and entered.
The man behind the desk was in his early forties with a dark, swarthy complexion and a thick black moustache which arched over the corners of his mouth.
He looked up from the document he was reading and his eyes lingered on her body before he sat back and raised his eyebrows quizzically, waiting for her to speak.
‘Are you Captain Farouk?’ she asked.
‘That's what it says,’ he replied in faultless English, gesturing to the nameplate on his desk.
‘If you read Arabic,’ Sabrina replied with a smile.
‘I spoke to you earlier on the phone —‘
‘Ah, yes,’ Farouk cut in and glanced down at the notepad in front of him.
‘Miss Cassidy, not so?’
‘Sabrina Cassidy,’ she replied, using the name on her UNACO passport.
‘Please, won't you sit down, Miss Cassidy?’
Farouk said, indicating the wooden chair in front of his desk.
‘Thank you,’ she said and sat down.
‘Is this your first time in Beirut?’
‘Yes,’ she replied truthfully.
‘I didn't know where to begin looking for Mike so I called the police and they put me on to you.
They said you were in charge of the  investigation.’
She feigned nervousness by fidgeting with the handbag in her lap.
‘But what investigation?
What's happened?’
Farouk raised his hand to silence her.
‘There's a warrant out for the arrest of Michael Green.’
The name on one of the passports Graham had drawn from UNACO stores in New York.
She sat forward.
‘On what charge?’
‘Murder.’
She slumped back in the chair.
‘Oh, my God.
Murder?
I don't believe it.
Sure, Mike's a bit of a rebel but he'd never kill anybody.’
Farouk uncapped his pen and pulled the notepad towards him.
‘I'd like to ask you a few questions, Miss Cassidy?’
‘Yes, of course,’ she replied, continuing to feign nervousness.
‘Anything.’
‘You said on the phone that he'd called you in New York.
What exactly did he say?’
‘All he said was that he was in trouble and that he needed some money to get out of the country.
Then the line went dead.’
‘Do you know why he was here?’
‘The first I knew he was in Beirut was when he rang me.’
She sighed deeply.
‘Mike's a loner.
It's not the first time he's gone off by himself.’
‘And he owns a company in New York?’
Farouk said, consulting his notes again.
‘Whitaker Haulage,’ she added.
‘He's the boss.’
‘Yes, I know.
We found some business cards in his hotel room.’
Farouk tapped thoughtfully on the notepad.
‘And his fellow directors don't mind him just  going off by himself without letting them know where he is?
What if something were to happen to the company?’
‘They're used to his erratic behaviour by now.
And anyway, he pays their salaries.
What can they say?’
‘Did he have any friends that you knew of in Beirut?’
She shook her head.
‘None that he ever mentioned.’
‘Russell Laidlaw?’
She pretended to think for a moment.
Then she shook her head again.
‘No, I can't say the name means anything to me.
Is that the man who was murdered?’
‘No,’ Farouk replied.
‘He was the last person to see your boyfriend here in Beirut.
He used to be in the Special Forces in America, the Delta unit.’
‘Are you suggesting that Mike was once a member of Delta?’
She shook her head in disbelief.
‘I don't believe it.
Not for one minute.’
‘I'm not suggesting anything, Miss Cassidy.
It's just strange that Laidlaw was with Delta and the murdered man, Barak, was an informer for Delta here in Beirut.
Delta seems to be the common denominator, doesn't it?’
‘Haven't you asked this man Laidlaw about Mike?’
‘He claims to have met him for the first time at the Windorah; it's a bar frequented mainly by foreigners.
The owner's borne out his story.
So I'm back to square one.’
‘Can't you ask Delta?’
‘I already have.
They say no Michael Green has ever been with them.
And it took a lot of persuasion for them to just admit that.’
‘How do you know Mike was involved?
Did someone see him?’
‘His fingerprints were on the murder weapon.
I checked with Interpol and they confirmed they were his prints.’
‘Interpol?’ she replied with surprise.
‘You mean he had a criminal record?’
‘No, but the New York police had his prints on file.’
The NYPD had Graham's fingerprints on file.
They had all UNACO operatives' fingerprints on file.
It was a precaution in case any of them were injured, or killed, and weren't carrying any formal identification.
But Michael Green?
Then it hit her.
Why hadn't she thought of it when Kolchinsky briefed them?
UNACO must have given the NYPD permission to release the prints under Graham's assumed name.
But why?
It made no sense.
They had set up their own operative.
She wanted some answers and she was determined to get them when she next spoke to Kolchinsky.
‘Is something wrong, Miss Cassidy?’
Farouk said, noticing her frown.
She cursed herself silently for letting her guard drop.
‘Sorry, I was just surprised that the New York police had his fingerprints on file.
I never realized he had a criminal record.’
‘He was once convicted of a drink-driving offence.’
‘I didn't know that,’ she said then sat forward, her eyes burrowing into Farouk.
‘I still don't believe Mike killed this man.
It's not in his character.’
‘Well, unless he turns himself in we have to assume that he is the killer.
And the longer he remains on the run, the worse it will become for him.’
‘I think he's being held against his will somewhere,’ she said.
‘Perhaps he's already fled the country.
Interpol's been alerted.’
‘How could he have fled the country without any money?’
She shook her head.
‘No, it all points to him being held against his will somewhere.
Mike never travels without cash and credit cards.
So why call me unless he had lost them?
Or had them stolen?’
‘You really believe he's innocent, don't you?’
‘Yes, I do.’
She got to her feet.
‘Is there anything I can do to help him?’
‘It's a police matter now, Miss Cassidy.’
Farouk capped his pen and pointed it at her.
‘If he should contact you, tell him to call me.
It would be in his best interests.’
‘I doubt he will call me,’ she said with a dejected shrug.
‘He doesn't even know I'm here.’
Farouk got to his feet and came round the desk to shake her hand.
‘Thank you for your time, Miss Cassidy.’
She nodded and walked to the door.
‘Oh, Miss Cassidy?’
Farouk waited until she turned to look at him.
‘If you're caught trying to help him escape you'll be charged with aiding and abetting a wanted criminal.
Bear it in mind.’
‘Sure,’ she replied and closed the door behind her.
Laidlaw had been detained by the police only hours after Barak's murder and although they had interrogated him at regular intervals every four hours, trying to break him down, he had managed to stick to his  story.
He had met Graham, or Green as he had referred to him throughout the interrogation, for the first time at the Windorah.
They had talked for a while then he had given Green a lift back to his hotel.
He had never seen him again after that.
He knew no-one had seen him at Barak's house otherwise he'd have been charged straight away.
He had been finally released after thirty-six hours.
He had tried to sleep when he got home but to no avail.
The voice haunted him: the voice of the policeman, Farouk.
But he had never seen Farouk's face.
He had asked the questions at every interrogation but always from behind the sanctuary of a powerful table lamp.
Why hadn't he shown his face?
Laidlaw had tacked his brains over and over but he couldn't place the name.
So why had he been so secretive?
Laidlaw knew he could be overreacting from lack of sleep — it could have been a plan to try and break him down: a voice, no face.
But still it troubled him.
Who was Farouk?
He punched the pillow angrily.
Forget Farouk.
Just get some sleep.
But he couldn't.
That monotonous, grinding voice was in his head and he couldn't get rid of it.
He kicked the sheet off and swung his legs onto the floor.
Pushing the hair from his face he looked at the bedside clock.
It had been five hours since he'd got home, and he hadn't slept in that time.
All because of that damn voice.
He stifled a yawn then stood up and went into the kitchen.
He opened the freezer and helped himself to a cold beer and the last of the chicken drumsticks from the packet he had bought earlier in the week.
He tossed the empty packet onto the overflowing bin in the corner of the room and sat  down at the table.
Just as he was about to open the beer the doorbell rang.
He shook his head in despair then got to his feet and went to open the door.
‘Russell Laidlaw?’
‘That's right,’ Laidlaw muttered.
‘You're not a reporter, are you?’
‘My name's Sabrina Cassidy, I'm a friend of Mike's.’
‘Mike?’
‘Mike Graham,’ Sabrina retorted with a hint of irritation in her voice.
‘We need to talk.’
‘Look, come back later.
I'm absolutely exhausted.
I've been in police custody for the last thirty-six hours.
And it's all thanks to your friend Mike.’
‘I think he's in trouble,’ she said.
‘Please, we need to talk.’
Laidlaw rubbed his eyes wearily then pulled open the door.
‘What the hell.
I couldn't sleep anyway.’
‘Thanks,’ she said and stepped inside.
‘You'll have to forgive the mess,’ Laidlaw said, closing the door.
‘I'm not very domesticated.’
She followed him into the kitchen and sat down in the chair offered to her.
‘You want a beer?’ he asked.
‘Coffee, if you've got it.’
‘Somewhere,’ he replied and switched the kettle on before rummaging through the drawers.
He found the coffee jar and put a heaped spoonful into the only clean mug he could find.
‘You say you're a friend of Mike's.
You work with him?’
‘That's right,’ she replied.
Laidlaw opened the beer and drank a mouthful.
‘And you're out here to find him?
Well, I wish you luck.’
‘You saw him, didn't you?’
‘I met him, yes — at the Windorah; it's a bar in town.
We talked a bit then I gave him a lift back to his hotel.
I never saw him after that.’
Sabrina exhaled deeply.
‘How can I convince you I'm on the level?’
Laidlaw filled the cup with hot water then placed it on the table in front of her.
He put the milk bottle beside the cup.
‘Help yourself.
Look, Miss Cassidy, I met your friend —‘
‘Spare me the act,’ she cut in angrily.
‘You served in Delta together.
It was on an operation in Libya that his family was kidnapped by Arab terrorists to try and force him to countermand the order to attack.
The two men behind the kidnapping were Salim Al-Makesh and Jean-Jacques Bernard.
Al-Makesh was killed by the Israelis.
Bernard was thought to have been killed in a car-bomb attack a year and a half ago.
Mike obviously found out Bernard was alive and came out here to get him.
You were his contact.
That's all we know.
I've been sent here to find out what really happened and get him back to the States.’
Laidlaw pulled out the chair opposite her and sat down.
‘Carrie gave Mike a watch as a Christmas present.
What make was it?’
‘Piaget.
Gold-plated.
And it was a birthday present.
Satisfied?’
Laidlaw nodded.
‘Satisfied.
Who's this ‘we’ you mentioned?’
‘I can't tell you, I'm afraid.’
‘Undercover work in other words?’
‘Something like that,’ she replied.
‘Are you his partner?’
She nodded.
‘Did you tip him off about Bernard?’
‘Yeah.
I saw Bernard outside the American University Hospital.
I knew Mike would want to know.’
‘And where did this Barak fit into the picture?’
‘Barak had been a Delta contact for years.
If anybody could find Bernard, then he could.
Until Mike put a bullet in his back.’
‘Mike didn't kill him, you know that,’ she retorted sharply.
‘All I know is that when I reached the house Barak was dead.
Then I saw Barak's car being driven away at high speed.
And Mike had gone.
Put two and two together.’
‘It has to be a set-up.
Why kill the one man capable of leading him to Bernard?
It makes no sense.’
‘I wasn't there when he went into the house.
He insisted on that.
I don't know what they discussed.’
‘Only Mike knows that.
That's why we have to find him.’
‘Not ‘we’.
You can count me out.
I put myself on the line for him once already and look where it got me: thirty-six hours in jail; Interrogations every four hours.
No, Miss Cassidy, if you want to find Mike, you find him by yourself.’
‘I don't know my way around Beirut.’
‘So get a guide.
There's plenty of them.
And they don't cost much.’
‘If it's money —’
‘Don't insult me, Miss Cassidy,’ Laidlaw snapped sharply.
She raised a hand in apology.
‘I'm sorry.
I shouldn't have said that.
I need your help, Mr Laidlaw.
And so does Mike.
If the police get to him first, he'll be put away for life.’
‘And what if he did kill Barak?
What if he is guilty?
You're going to help a killer flee justice.’
‘I don't know how well you know Mike.
I think I know him pretty well.
He's a damn good professional and he wouldn't jeopardize his career by putting a bullet in the back of some two-bit informer.’
‘Mike's changed,’ Laidlaw answered, staring at the beer can he was turning on the table.
‘I noticed that the moment we met.
He used to be the most stable guy I ever knew.
Nothing ever riled him.
But that was before he lost his family.
Now he's bitter, unpredictable: I'd even say psychotic.
I don't go along with your assessment, Miss Cassidy.
I think he was more than capable of shooting Barak in the back.
Especially if you consider he was on the trail of the man he believes had his family abducted and almost certainly murdered.
No, I don't want any more to do with Mike.
He's trouble.’
Sabrina pushed her chair back and stood up, her eyes blazing.
‘At least Mike hasn't run away from his past.
What about you?
Hiding away in this squalor, trying to forget what happened in Honduras.’
She noticed the surprise in his eyes.
‘Oh, I know all about you, Mr Laidlaw.
I read your file on the plane.
I know why you left Delta.
I don't think you're in any position to pass judgement on someone like Mike.’
‘Just get out,’ Laidlaw hissed between clenched teeth.
‘My pleasure,’ she retorted then walked to the door where she paused to look back at him.
‘And don't forget, you were the one who contacted Mike in the first place.
It's thanks to you that he's in this mess right now.
Think about that when you open your next beer.’
Laidlaw sunk his face into his hands.
A moment later the front door slammed shut.
He suddenly grabbed the beer can and hurled it against the wall then upturned the table, sending it crashing against the cooker.
He checked himself as he was about to kick the chair out of the way then walked slowly to the bedroom and slumped onto the bed.
He put his hands behind his head and closed his eyes.
Within minutes he was asleep.
It proved to be a disturbed, restless sleep.
‘You look like death,’ Dave Jenkins said when Laidlaw arrived at the Windorah that evening.
‘I feel like it,’ Laidlaw retorted, climbing onto one of the bar stools.
‘A beer, Dave.’
‘Comin' up,’ Jenkins replied, uncapping a Budweiser and placing it on the counter in front of Laidlaw.
‘Where were you last night?
I was thinking about sending out the cavalry to look for you if you hadn't shown up tonight.’
‘It's nice to be missed,’ Laidlaw muttered then took a drink of beer.
‘So where were you last night?’
Laidlaw shrugged.
‘I didn't fancy coming in.
Is that such a crime?’
‘If it affects my profits, yes,’ Jenkins said with a grin then pushed a coaster across to Laidlaw.
‘What do you think of the design?
A batch of them came in this morning.’
‘What?’
Laidlaw replied in amazement.
‘Just look at the design.’
Jenkins picked up another four and handed them out to the other customers sitting at the counter.
Laidlaw glanced at it, turned it over, and was about to discard it when he saw the handwritten note scrawled across it.
He looked up but Jenkins was busy discussing the logo with one of the other customers.
He read the note: Go upstairs to Room 4.
Knock twice.
Pause.
Knock twice more.
‘Interesting, isn't it?’
Jenkins said, deftly taking the coaster from Laidlaw's hand and discarding it unobtrusively in the bin under the counter.
‘But then I'm biased anyway.’
Laidlaw took another mouthful of beer then got to his feet and walked to the stairs at the end of the room.
He paused, his hand on the banister.
What the hell was going on?
He sighed deeply then mounted the stairs and looked around him slowly.
The Windorah had been a small family hotel before Jenkins bought it seven years earlier.
The ten rooms were all situated on the first floor.
Jenkins had decided to concentrate on the bar and closed the rooms.
He converted the first two into toilets and the others were only used for customers, invariably foreign journalists who were too drunk to drive home.
He never charged for the rooms and the journalists  repaid him by keeping their custom at the bar.
Laidlaw stopped outside Room 4, glanced round to see that nobody was about, then knocked twice.
He paused momentarily then knocked twice more.
A bolt was drawn back from inside then the door opened fractionally before a hand reached out and hauled him into the room.
The door closed behind him immediately.
‘Mike?’
Laidlaw said in amazement as Graham bolted the door.
‘You took your time!
Where the hell were you last night?’
‘Being interrogated on a murder charge,’ Laidlaw snapped back.
‘Thirty-six hours without any sleep.
And all thanks to you.
You've got some explaining to do.’
Graham walked to the unmade bed and sat down.
‘I didn't kill Barak.’
‘So where were you when I got to the house?
And who drove off in Barak's Peugeot?’
Graham rubbed his unshaven face and looked up at Laidlaw.
‘All I know is that when I entered the house someone coshed me.
When I woke up I was in some back alley.
I still don't know where it was.
And my Beretta was gone.’
‘The police have got it,’ Laidlaw said coldly.
‘It was the gun that killed Barak.’
‘I know,’ Graham retorted.
‘Why the hell do you think I've been holed up here since yesterday?
When I saw my picture on the front page of the local newspaper I knew it meant trouble.’
‘So why did you come here?’
‘I went to your house first but the cops were  watching it.
I also saw them putting a tap on your phone.
That's why I couldn't call you.
Then I thought of Dave.
He's the only other guy I could trust here.’
Laidlaw moved to the window and tweaked the edge of the curtains.
The police car that had followed him to the Windorah was still parked across the road.
‘Were you followed here?’
Graham asked.
‘Yeah,’ Laidlaw replied, letting the curtain fall back into place.
‘But that was to be expected.
Jeez, I still don't know what to make of your story.
It doesn't make sense.
If Bernard did kill Barak, why not kill you as well?
What would he have to gain by setting you up?’
‘That question's been going round in my head ever since I woke up in that alley.’
‘And?’
‘And nothing,’ Graham replied.
‘Like you said, it makes no sense.
I'm still a threat to him alive.’
‘What if Bernard wasn't behind it?’
‘It has to be Bernard.
Hell, I wish I knew why though.’
Laidlaw looked down at Graham.
‘The cops aren't the only ones on your tail.
Your partner's in town.’
Graham's eyes narrowed suspiciously.
‘My partner?’
‘Calls herself Sabrina Cassidy.
Looks like a model out of one of those Coke ads, only better.’
Graham smiled faintly.
‘That's her.
When did she get in?’
‘Dunno.
We didn't exactly hit it off.’
‘I know what you mean.
I didn't get on with her either when we started working together.
We'd fight  like cat and dog.
Hell, we still have our spats.
But she's still a damn good professional all the same.’
‘She thinks a lot of you, you know.
I made the mistake of criticizing you and she came down on me like a ton of bricks.’
‘She's very maternal.
It can be a pain in the ass at times.’
‘Is that what you call it?’
Laidlaw replied, an eyebrow raised quizzically.
There were two knocks on the door before Graham could muster a reply.
A pause then another two knocks.
‘That's Dave,’ Graham said.
‘He said he'd be up.
I'll get him to find out where Sabrina's staying.’
Graham unlocked the door.
Jenkins entered, followed by two Arabs in jeans and open-necked shirts.
Both were armed with Russian Makarova pistols.
‘I'm sorry, Mike,’ Jenkins said, giving Graham a despairing look.
‘They caught me unawares.
They were in the opposite room.’
‘Shut up!’ one of the Arabs snapped in a thick English accent.
‘You are Mike Graham?’
Graham nodded slowly.
‘Who are you?
Bernard's goons?’
‘Captain Farouk want to see you,’ the Arab replied.
‘That's the bastard who interrogated me,’ Laidlaw hissed.
‘If you not come, the girl will die.’
The Arab took a passport from his pocket and tossed it on the bed.
‘Captain Farouk say you look.
He serious.’
Graham picked up the passport and looked at  Laidlaw.
‘It's Sabrina's.’
He turned on the English-speaking Arab.
‘If you or this Farouk have touched her I'll tear you apart with my bare hands.’
The Arab's face remained motionless.
‘You come.
All of you.’
‘Farouk wants me, let the others go,’ Graham said.
‘If you not come, the girl will die.’
‘It's like talking to a robot,’ Graham hissed then glanced at Jenkins and Laidlaw.
‘We're going to have to do as he says.
I'm sorry.’
‘What about the bar?’
Jenkins asked.
‘The bar closed.’
‘Closed?’
Jenkins replied indignantly.
‘It has been closed.
We go out the back door.
And if you are thinking about trying to fight us —‘
‘Yeah, we know,’ Graham cut in angrily.
‘The girl will die,’ the Arab concluded.
Jenkins led the way down the stairs into the now empty bar room.
He opened the hatchway at the end of the counter then turned to the English-speaking Arab.
‘Can I at least lock up?’
The Arab nodded then ordered his accomplice to go with Jenkins.
When they returned Jenkins again led the way out into the side alley behind the bar.
A black van was parked by the door.
Jenkins locked the door, pocketed the keys, then his hands were tied behind his back before he was bundled into the back of the van after Graham and Laidlaw.
The doors were closed, enveloping them in darkness, and locked from the outside.
The two Arabs then climbed into the front and moments later the van spluttered into life and turned out of the alley.
‘Mike, can you reach into my jacket pocket?’
Jenkins said, nudging Graham with his elbow.
‘What the hell for?’
‘My keys,’ Jenkins replied.
‘There's a Swiss Army knife on the keyring.
That's why I insisted on locking the bar.
We can cut ourselves free.’
‘Good thinking, Dave, but we can't risk it.’
‘What do you mean?’
Jenkins replied.
‘If we can cut ourselves free we can jump those two when they open the doors again.
Three against two.
We'd have a good chance of overpowering them.’
‘If we could be sure it would only be the two of them.
What if there are others waiting for us when we do reach our destination?’
‘It's worth a try, surely?’
Jenkins retorted.
‘It's not just that.
We don't know where Sabrina is.
Even if we did manage to overpower them we could be putting her life in danger.
I won't take that risk.’
‘Great, so we're just going to sit here like trussed up chickens —‘
‘If you quit whining, Dave, I could tell you what I've got in mind.’
‘That's gratitude for you.
Who took you in —‘
‘Dave, shut up,’ Laidlaw snapped then turned to Graham beside him.
‘Well, what's the plan?’
‘We loosen our ropes.
Then, once we know Sabrina's safe we can make our move.
It's a long shot, I know, but there isn't much else we can do under the circumstances.’
‘I had the same idea,’ Laidlaw said.
‘Let's just hope Cheech and Chong up front aren't telepathic.’
‘We've got to chance it,’ Graham replied grimly.
They set about loosening the ropes just enough for them to be able to reach the knot once Graham gave the signal.
Their only concern was that, in the darkness, one, or more, of the ropes had been loosened too much and it would be noticed when they emerged from the back of the van.
All they could do was wait.
Twenty minutes later the van came to a halt, but the engine was kept running.
They heard one of the Arabs get out and moments later a metal gate was opened and the van drove forward a few feet before stopping again, presumably to pick up the Arab.
They drove another couple of hundred yards before the van came to a halt and the engine was switched off.
This time both Arabs got out and the back doors were unlocked.
The English-speaking Arab ordered them to get out.
Jenkins scrambled out first, followed by Graham and Laidlaw.
They looked around.
They were in an illuminated yard lined with a row of six red and black pantechnicons.
Graham couldn't understand the writing across the side of the nearest one.
It was in Arabic.
The Arabs spoke briefly together then the English-speaking one stepped back, his Makarova trained on the three men.
His colleague walked behind Jenkins and tugged at the rope binding his wrists.
He cursed angrily and immediately tightened it.
Graham and Laidlaw remained motionless, not daring to look at each other.
Laidlaw was spun round and the Arab checked his rope then he was pushed aside and Graham subjected to the same treatment.
The Arab shook his head at his colleague.
‘Inside,’ the English-speaking Arab ordered, gesturing with the pistol to the door behind him.
Graham and Laidlaw exchanged relieved glances then followed Jenkins into the white-walled corridor.
They were led to a metal door.
The English-speaking Arab pulled it open and indicated for them to enter.
They found themselves in a cavernous room lined with scarred wooden workbenches and rows of metal hooks hanging from the ceiling.
They were all on runners and could be manoeuvred the length of the room.
It was spotlessly clean.
The second Arab walked to a door and disappeared inside.
Moments later the door opened and he emerged with Sabrina.
Her hands were bound behind her back but she was otherwise unhurt.
He pushed her onto a chair by the door.
Graham took a step towards her but the English-speaking Arab levelled the pistol menacingly at him and ordered him to remain where he was.
‘You O K?’
Graham called out.
‘I'm fine.
I didn't realize Farouk…’ she trailed off when she saw Graham and Laidlaw both look past her, their eyes riveted on the man who had appeared in the doorway.
‘Good to see you again, Mr Graham.
It's been a long time.’
Sabrina looked from Farouk to Graham, a puzzled frown on her face.
‘You know Farouk?’
‘Farouk?’
Graham snorted contemptuously.
‘That's Salim Al-Makesh.’
‘What?’
Sabrina replied in amazement.
‘But he was killed by Israeli commandos in Damascus.’
‘That's obviously what they wanted us to believe,’ Graham said without taking his eyes of Al-Makesh.
‘Which only leaves one logical explanation.
You're working for the Israelis now, aren't you?’
Al-Makesh stepped away from the door, his hands dug into his trouser pockets.
He nodded.
‘It was either that or be killed.
It was a question of survival.’
‘Now it makes sense,’ Laidlaw said, nodding to himself.
‘I couldn't understand why you never showed yourself when you were interrogating me.
You knew I'd recognize you straight away.’
‘I wasn't sure whether you would or not,’ Al-Makesh replied.
‘I have changed my appearance considerably since I was with the Black June but it seems I made the right decision after all.’
‘Who killed Barak?’
Graham demanded.
‘You or Bernard?’
‘Bernard.
I had nothing to do with it,’ Al-Makesh said.
‘When Barak told him you were in Beirut —‘
‘Barak worked for him?’
Graham interceded.
‘Barak worked for anyone who paid him,’ Al-Makesh replied with a dismissive shrug.
‘But he had started to drink heavily in recent months and Bernard felt he had become a liability.
So when he heard you were in town he hit on a plan to get rid of both of you.
He'd kill Barak and set you up as the fall guy — I believe that's the term you Americans use.
He would knock you out when you went to the house, kill Barak, then dump you in an alley near the Cola Roundabout in western Beirut.
All I had to do was go there and arrest you.
But when I got there, you'd gone.’
‘Why didn't Bernard just kill me when he had the chance?’
Graham asked.
‘And have UNACO crawling all over Beirut?’
Al-Makesh  smiled when Graham looked at him in surprise.
‘I have my sources, just like you.
But if you were arrested for murder they would have to be very careful not to blow their cover.
Any sort of publicity could have splashed UNACO across the front page of every newspaper in the world.’
‘I would have recognized you the moment I saw you,’ Graham said.
‘Who would have believed you?
The Israeli Mossad would have confirmed that I'd been killed in Damascus.
I have a watertight cover for all those years I was with the Black June.
The authorities would think you'd finally cracked under the pressure of what had happened to your family.
You'd probably have ended up in an asylum.’
‘I could have backed him up,’ Laidlaw said.
‘My superiors would have dismissed Graham's allegations about my past as the ramblings of a broken man.
But if you'd also been able to identify me then they would certainly have initiated an investigation.
For that reason you would have had to be silenced once Graham was in custody.
An accident.
But when Bernard's plan backfired I needed you alive in case you could lead me to Graham.
Which, as it turned out, you did.’
‘Were the CIA in on this?’
Sabrina asked.
‘No,’ Al-Makesh replied bluntly.
‘And neither were the Mossad.’
‘The CIA?’
Graham asked, staring at Sabrina.
‘What the hell have they got to do with this?’
‘Bernard works for them,’ she told him.
‘What?’
Graham snarled.
‘She's right,’ Al-Makesh said then gestured around him.
‘This all belongs to Bernard.
It's a meat-processing plant, paid for with money from a CIA slush fund.
He's now a legitimate businessman.’
‘And how did the Israelis get you into the police?’
Sabrina asked.
‘I was a policeman for twelve years in Jordan before I joined the Black June.
It wasn't difficult for me to fit in here.
So not only am I in a job I know, I'm also in a position to pass vital information back to the Israelis.
It's the perfect cover.’
‘And now you're going to kill us to protect your cover,’ Laidlaw concluded.
‘You know too much.’
‘Kill us and UNACO will be crawling all over Beirut,’ Sabrina warned him.
‘I'll have to take that risk.
But even if they do come they still won't find any bodies.
There's a beef shipment due out tomorrow destined for Syria.
You'll be going with it.’
Al-Makesh pointed to a wooden container in the corner of the room.
‘Your bodies will be put in there.
The container will then be sealed and loaded onto one of the trucks in the morning.
Then, once over the border, it will conveniently disappear.
Who knows how long it will take before it's discovered?’
‘All neatly worked out,’ Graham said facetiously.
‘You two must be very proud of yourselves.’
‘This is all my idea.
Bernard doesn't even know you're here.
We have an arrangement.
I use this place if I need to get rid of someone.
The blood gets washed away in the morning so there's no evidence to suggest  a crime ever took place.
And his foreman makes sure the containers are loaded onto the trucks and dumped over the border.
No questions asked.
All very amicable.’
Al-Makesh looked at the English-speaking Arab standing beside Graham.
‘Samir, you know what to do.’
Graham had managed to untie his hands soon after entering the room and lashed out at Samir, catching him on the side of the face with his fist, rocking him back against the wall.
The Makarova fell to the floor.
Laidlaw, who had also managed to untie his hands, tackled the second Arab.
Graham picked up the Makarova and shot the second Arab as he turned his pistol on Laidlaw.
Laidlaw's hand was on his P220 automatic but he knew he couldn't fire it, no matter how hard he tried.
Samir grabbed Graham from behind as Al-Makesh unholstered his Beretta.
Graham broke the hold and swivelled Samir round as Al-Makesh fired.
The bullet took Samir in the chest.
Sabrina leaped from her chair and shoulder-charged Al-Makesh before he could fire again.
His gun clattered noisily to the floor.
Graham swung the Makarova on Al-Makesh who was still reaching for the Beretta.
All the hate welled up inside him as he thought of Carrie and Mikey.
He squeezed the trigger.
Nothing happened.
The pistol had jammed.
‘Shoot him!’
Graham screamed at Laidlaw who was staring at the pistol in his hand.
‘Russ, shoot him!’
Al-Makesh's fingers curled around the Beretta.
Sabrina lunged at him.
He swung the gun on her.
She kicked out, catching him on the wrist.
The bullet was deflected harmlessly into the ceiling.
Graham tore  Laidlaw's P220 automatic from his hand and shot Al-Makesh through the head.
He was dead before his body hit the floor.
Graham swung round to Laidlaw and grabbed him by the front of his shirt.
‘What the hell were you playing at?
Christ, Russ, he was about to kill us and you're standing there admiring the damn gun.
What's your problem?’
Sabrina was quick to intervene and nudged Graham with her elbow.
‘Mike, untie me.’
Graham shoved Laidlaw away from him then turned to Sabrina and untied her hands.
‘Who's the other guy?’ she asked, massaging her wrists.
‘Dave Jenkins, he runs the Windorah, it's a bar in the city.
He's been hiding me for the last couple of days.’
Jenkins waited until Laidlaw had untied his hands then approached Graham who introduced him to Sabrina.
‘Mike, you deliberately loosened my ropes more than you needed to.
Why?’
‘You're not a soldier, Dave.
I didn't want to get you involved in the fighting.
Also, it was a psychological move.
I knew the goon would automatically check to see if our ropes were as loose as yours.
That's how we were able to deceive him.’
Graham looked angrily at Laidlaw.
‘I should have left your ropes loose as well.’
‘You've got every right to be mad at me, Mike.
I know I should have told you but…’ he trailed off with a shrug and stared dejectedly at his feet.
‘Told me what?’
Graham demanded.
‘That you've become some kind of born-again pacifist?’
‘Can we discuss this later?’
Sabrina said, stepping between them.
‘We've got to get out of here.
What if someone heard the shots?’
‘Al-Makesh would have taken care of that,’ Graham said.
‘He would hardly have wanted anyone alerting the authorities, would he?’
‘I guess not,’ Sabrina replied then gestured towards the bodies.
‘What about them?’
‘They take our places when the meat shipment leaves for Syria tomorrow,’ Graham answered.
‘What if they check the container?’
Jenkins asked.
‘They won't if it's sealed.
They'll just assume it's us.
Come on, let's get them in the container.’
They carried the bodies in silence across the room and dumped them into the wooden container.
Graham then nailed on the lid.
‘Can we get out of here now?’
‘Sure, Dave,’ Graham answered with a reassuring smile.
‘We've got to talk,’ Sabrina said to Graham.
‘Alone.’
‘Come back to the Windorah, 'Jenkins offered.
‘You can talk there in private.’
‘Yeah, we'll take you up on that, Dave,’ Graham said then suddenly looked despairingly at the sealed container.
‘Oh God, the keys for the van…’
‘Are here,’ Sabrina said, jangling them behind Graham.
‘Well, someone had to be alert.’
‘What would I do without you?’
Graham replied facetiously.
‘What indeed?’ she answered with a questioning glance in his direction before walking to the door.
Jenkins unlocked one of the bedrooms when they got back to the Windorah and switched on the light after he had crossed to the window to draw the curtains.
‘Anyone thirsty?’
‘I'd love a coffee,’ Sabrina said, sinking into the armchair beside the window.
‘Make that two,’ Graham added.
‘Russell?’
‘Beer please, Dave,’ Laidlaw replied.
Jenkins left the room.
‘You want me to leave as well?’
Laidlaw asked.
‘Not until you've told me what the hell happened to make you trigger shy.’
Graham sat on the edge of the bed and looked up at Laidlaw.
‘Well?’
Laidlaw's eyes flickered towards Sabrina.
She knew.
She'd read his dossier.
He pulled up the wooden chair from beside the bed and sat down.
‘Last year we went into Honduras to help the government troops suppress an attempted coup d'état by Communist-backed rebels.
We'd been there about a week when we got news that the rebel leader and his council would be holding a meeting at a farmhouse on the outskirts of Choluteca — it's a town in the south of the country: rebel territory.
We were asked to infiltrate the area and retrieve as many documents as we could from the farmhouse.
But no prisoners.
Why, I don't know.
But those were our orders.
Six of us went in.
There wasn't a single guard on duty when we got there.
That should have alerted us.
But, as I said, we had our orders.
We launched our offensive just as the meeting was supposed to have started.
Three of us went in the front, the other three through the back.
We'd been  told which room would be used for the meeting so we didn't have to search the whole building.
We threw stun grenades into the room then went in firing.’
He shifted uncomfortably on the chair and wiped a bead of sweat that ran down the side of his face.
‘There were no rebels there.
Just four missionaries and thirty-five kids.
None of the kids were over ten.
Orphans of the war.
It only took us a few seconds to realize the mistake but by then twenty-eight kids and three of the missionaries were either dead or dying.
Two of the kids and the fourth missionary died later in hospital.
Five kids survived.
Five out of thirty-five.
The rebels blamed the massacre on the government troops and the government blamed it on the rebels.
It became just another story from Central America.
Nobody took much notice.’
He rubbed his hands over his face.
‘The six of us were immediately flown back to the States to undergo psychiatric treatment.
I was the worst affected.
I couldn't touch a gun.
Christ, I even broke out into a sweat if I saw one on TV.
The other guys responded to treatment.
I didn't.
After six months the psychiatrists gave up on me.
So I was retired.
It was another six months before I was able to pick up a gun again.
But I still couldn't touch the trigger.
I wanted to shoot that bastard tonight, Mike.
My brain told me to pull the trigger but my finger wouldn't respond.
I know I should have told you earlier but I reasoned that if I did you wouldn't want me along; and you needed a guide.
You wouldn't have lasted five minutes if you'd gone after Bernard by yourself.
They protect their own around here.’
‘Yeah, I know.’
Graham stood up and patted Laidlaw on the shoulder.
‘I'm sorry, buddy.
I only wish you'd told me this earlier.
Like when we first met.
It would have saved a lot of unnecessary antagonism.’
‘I realize that now,’ Laidlaw replied with a shrug.
‘But like I said, I didn't think you'd want me along.’
‘I wouldn't have let you off that easily,’ Graham said with a half-smile.
The door opened and Jenkins entered carrying a tray.
He placed it on the bedside table.
Laidlaw took a beer, drank a mouthful, then looked at Graham.
‘You guys want us to leave?’
Sabrina nodded.
‘Please.
Mike and I need to talk.’
‘Sure,’ Laidlaw said then followed Jenkins to the door.
Graham closed the door behind them then turned back to Sabrina.
‘You're here to take me back, aren't you?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then you're wasting your time.
I came out here to find Bernard and that's what I intend to do.’
She sat down then outlined the case to him, careful not to leave anything out.
‘So what you're saying is that Bernard's the only person who knows when the hit on Mobuto's going to take place?’
Graham concluded once she had finished speaking.
She nodded.
‘And if you put a bullet into him before he can pass the information on to Bailey then Mobuto's as good as dead.
It would almost certainly mean the return of a dictatorship to Zimbala; and the reinstatement of the Security Police.
Could you  live with that on your conscience for the rest of your life?’
Graham rubbed his hands over his face then stared thoughtfully at the carpet for some time before finally looking up at Sabrina again.
‘I'll make a deal with you.’
‘A deal?’ she replied with a frown.
‘You help me find Bernard —‘
‘Forget it!’ she cut in sharply.
‘Hear me out, Sabrina.
If you help me find Bernard I'll wait until he's tipped off Bailey before I kill him.
If you refuse then I'll go after him regardless of what happens to Mobuto.
Could you live with that on your conscience for the rest of your life?’
‘I don't believe what I'm hearing,’ she replied.
‘What the hell's the matter with you, Mike?
This isn't some game show where you barter with another contestant for the big prize.
We're talking about a man's life here.
We're talking about the future of a country.’
‘If Bernard gets away after tipping off Bailey he's certain to be given a new identity by the CIA.
He could go anywhere he wanted and I'd never find him again.
Never.’
‘Let it go, Mike.
This vendetta's going to destroy you.
You didn't kill Barak; I can vouch for that when we get back to the States.
You'll catch hell for coming out here but that will be the end of it.
But if you kill Bernard you'll be thrown out of UNACO.
You could even be indicted for murder.
Is that what you want?’
‘I want Bernard, that's what I want.
And if they  throw me out…’ he trailed off with a shrug.
‘Those are my terms, Sabrina.
Take them or leave them.’
‘You do what you want, Mike,’ she snapped then got to her feet and strode to the door.
‘I've tried to reason with you.
I should have known better.
I'm going to call Sergei and tell him what's happened.’
Graham grabbed her arm as she opened the door.
‘Help me, Sabrina.
Please.
I don't want anything to happen to Mobuto.
But I have to go after Bernard, don't you see that?
I owe it to Carrie and Mikey.
I owe it to them.’
She pulled her arm free and walked to the booth, lifting the receiver off the wall.
She could hear Jenkins and Laidlaw talking in the bar room below her.
At least they were occupied.
She dialled the unlisted number, identified herself to Sarah at UNACO headquarters, and gave her the number of the phone to call back.
She replaced the receiver and tapped her fingers on the dog-eared directory as she waited for it to ring.
Graham appeared at the door.
She glanced at him but before he could speak the phone rang.
She picked up the receiver and had to identify herself again before she was patched through to Kolchinsky.
‘Sabrina?’
‘Speaking,’ she replied.
‘You just caught me.
I was on my way home.
Any news of Michael?’
She looked across at Graham, her mind still in turmoil over his ultimatum.
She knew if she helped him she would be reprimanded, perhaps even suspended.
But if she refused, Mobuto's life would  certainly be at risk.
She had to make a choice.
Then she thought of the picture Graham always carried in his wallet of Carrie and Mikey.
What price justice if Bernard were allowed to go free?
‘Sabrina, are you still there?’
Kolchinsky barked, interrupting her thoughts.
‘Sorry, Sergei, it's a bad line,’ she lied.
‘It's very clear this end.
I asked if there was any news of Michael?’
‘No, not yet.
Why was he set up?’
‘What?’
Kolchinsky replied in surprise.
‘You know exactly what I'm talking about, Sergei.
I spoke to the policeman in charge of the case this afternoon.
He said the NYPD identified Mike by his prints.
But they only know him as Graham.
He travelled under the name of Green.
How could they have matched the prints unless UNACO authorized it?’
‘We had no choice,’ Kolchinsky said at length.
‘If the Beirut police had continued to probe who knows what they might have uncovered?
We had to protect the organization.’
‘And what if Mike gets arrested?
Will UNACO leave him to rot in some Beirut jail to protect themselves?’
‘He brought this on himself.
It was an unauthorized mission.’
Kolchinsky sighed deeply.
‘No, we wouldn't leave him in some Beirut jail.
We'd get him out.
Somehow.
But don't let it come to that, Sabrina.
Find him and bring him back.’
‘That's easier said than done.
All my enquiries have drawn a blank so far.’
‘I suggest a change in tactics.
He's after Bernard, right?
If you find Bernard first you won't have to chase after him any more.
He'll come to you.
And then you can intercept him before he can get to Bernard.’
‘And how do you suggest I find Bernard?
According to Bailey's dossier, his bodyguards are Hezbollah fundamentalists.
They're hardly going to take very kindly to a woman poking her nose into their affairs, are they?’
‘They only act as his bodyguards in the Lebanon.
He flew out of Beirut last night, destination Habane.
He used the name Alain Devereux.’
‘Zimbala?
Why?’
‘I don't know.
Bailey told me this morning.
And he only found out from one of his operatives who had seen Bernard at Beirut Airport last night.’
‘So he still hasn't contacted Bailey about the hit?’
‘Not a word.
This is a critical stage of the operation, Sabrina.
That's why you've got to stop Michael from getting to Bernard.’
‘I'll get the next flight out to Habane,’ she assured him.
‘Who's my contact in Zimbala?’
‘We don't have anyone in Zimbala.
Bailey offered to get one of his men at the embassy to liaise with you but I decided against it.
I don't want the CIA interfering in our business.
What they will do is leave an envelope for you in one of the lockers at the airport.
It'll contain your hotel reservation, money, maps of the city — the usual.
I've also asked them to leave a Beretta there for you.
The key will be at the information desk.
But apart from that, you're on your own.’
‘It won't be the first time,’ she muttered.
‘Call me when you get there.
I hope to have more on Bernard by then.’
‘How's the Colonel?’
‘He's fine.
I saw him this morning.’
‘Send him my regards when you next see him, will you?’
‘Of course.
And Sabrina, be careful.’
‘You can count on it.’
She replaced the receiver and looked round at Graham who was hovering at the door.’
Bernard left for Zimbala last night.’
‘I got the gist of the conversation.
Why the sudden change of heart?
You were determined to spill the works when you went to the phone.’
‘What good would it have done telling Sergei I'd found you?
You wouldn't have come back with me anyway.
Then I'd have had to chase after you wherever you went.
It would have been like something out of the Keystone Cops .
At least this way I know where you are.
And I know Bernard will be able to tip off Bailey before you get to him.’
She gave him a wry smile.
‘Well, that's what I'll say in my defence when I get back.
I don't think it'll save me from suspension though.’
‘Why should you be suspended?
It's not as if I gave you much choice.
You did what you thought was best under the circumstances.
The Colonel can't fault you for that.
And what was all that about sending him your regards?
Is he ill?’
‘I haven't told you, have I?
With all this going on, it completely slipped my mind.’
‘Told me what?’
They returned to the room where she explained  about Philpott's heart attack and his subsequent convalescence at the Bellevue Hospital where he would remain for the next few days.
‘He can be a cantankerous old fossil at times but I hope this isn't going to force him to retire.
The place wouldn't be the same without him.’
‘It's up to his doctor to decide if he'll be fit enough to return to work.
But the signs are encouraging by all accounts.’
She gestured to the door.
‘Well, I'd better get back to the hotel and pack.’
‘How will I know where you're staying once you reach Zimbala?
You're sure to get there first.’
‘We don't need to travel separately.
UNACO don't have anyone in Zimbala so word can't get back to Sergei that we're working together.’
‘But word can get back to Bernard.
Remember, he doesn't know what happened at the factory tonight.
As far as he's concerned, I'm still a threat to him.
And that means he's sure to have people at the airport ready to intercept me the moment I arrive there.’
‘What about me?
If Al-Makesh knew we were with UNACO, then Bernard's sure to know it as well.
And for all he knows, we could be working together to track him down.’
Graham shook his head.
‘He'll know the real reason why you're in Beirut.’
‘How?
Sergei said Bernard hasn't been in touch with Bailey for days, certainly not since C.W. and I were assigned to the case.’
‘Because Al-Makesh knew why you were in Beirut.
All Bailey had to do was tell the Mossad why you were here and they would have got Al-Makesh to pass the  information on to Bernard.
How else do you think Al-Makesh knew we were from UNACO?
Not from some informer on the street corner.
From the Mossad.’
Graham sat on the bed and looked up at her.
‘Bernard will make sure you're given a free hand wherever you go.
You're his guardian angel — the one person keeping me away from him.
No, don't worry, you'll be perfectly safe in Zimbala.’
‘How are you going to get there?’
‘I don't know yet.
My best bet would probably be to fly into one of the neighbouring states and sneak over the border at night.
Which brings us back to my original question.
How will I know where to contact you?’
‘I'll have the use of a locker at the airport…’ she trailed off with a despondent sigh.
‘Sorry, I forget.
You can't go near the airport.’
‘Leave it there.
I'll sort something out.’
‘What name will you be using?’
He thought for a moment.
‘Well, I can't use Michael Green any more.
I'll use the Miles Grant passport.’
‘OK, I'll leave the key for the locker at the information counter.’
She glanced at her watch.
‘As I said, I'd better get back to the hotel.
I still have to make all the necessary travel arrangements before I go to bed.’
‘See you in Zimbala.’
She walked to the door then paused to look back suspiciously at him.
‘I've put my neck on the block for you, Mike.
Don't jump the gun and go after Bernard by yourself.’
‘as if I would,’ he replied, his hands held out in a gesture of mock innocence.
His face suddenly became serious.
‘We made a deal.
I'll stick to it.’
‘Sure,’ she replied with a quick smile then left the room.
He returned to his room and pulled his holdall out from under the bed.
He could hear Sabrina in the bar below talking to the two men.
Then silence.
He turned his attention to rounding up his clothes and packing them in the holdall.
‘Knock, knock,’ Laidlaw said from the open doorway behind him.
‘Come in, Russ,’ Graham said without looking round.
‘So, you're off on your travels again.
Where to now, or can't you say?’
‘You know the drill,’ Graham said.
‘You're going after Bernard, aren't you?’
Graham zipped up his toilet bag and put it in the holdall.
‘Perhaps.’
‘You need an extra pair of hands?’
Graham looked round sharply and was about to shake his head when he paused to weigh up the pros and cons of the situation.
He was going into the unknown.
Alone.
Hell, he didn't even know where he was going.
He could use someone with Laidlaw's experience.
He couldn't speak any foreign languages.
He knew Laidlaw spoke French, one of the main languages of Zimbala.
But he was now officially working on UNACO time.
And Laidlaw was an outsider, an outsider who couldn't even be relied upon to fire a gun in a crisis.
Some decision.
‘What do you know about Zimbala?’
‘Small country in Africa.
Borders Chad and Niger.
It used to be a dictatorship —‘
‘OK,’ Graham cut in, holding up his hands to silence Laidlaw.
‘I've got to rendezvous with Sabrina in Zimbala.
She's flying there.
I can't risk that.
Bernard's sure to have his spies out looking for me.
I'm going to have to fly to either Chad or Niger and slip over the border by car.
But I don't speak French or Arabic so I'm going to stick out like the proverbial sore thumb.
And that means attracting unnecessary attention that could get back to Bernard.’
‘And you want me to get you into Zimbala.’
‘You speak French.’
‘And Arabic,’ Laidlaw added then smiled wryly.
‘It'll be like old times.’
‘All I want you to do is get me to Habane.
That's where I'm meeting Sabrina.
Then I'll cut you loose.’
Graham immediately saw the disappointment in Laidlaw's eyes.
‘What if we're caught in a firefight when we find Bernard?
You'd only be a liability.
I don't want your death on my conscience, Russ.
We've been through too much together.’
Laidlaw nodded, his face grim.
‘I hear what you're saying, Mike.
I'll get you to Habane.’
‘Thanks,’ Graham said.
‘Come on, we'll sort out the flight arrangements downstairs.’
Laidlaw walked to the door then looked round at Graham, a faint smile touching the corners of his lips.
‘It won't be the first time I've had to come to your rescue and haul your ass out of trouble.’
‘Like hell,’ Graham replied good-humouredly then picked up his holdall and followed Laidlaw into the corridor, closing the door behind him.
FIVE
Whitlock drove his white BMW down the ramp into the basement carpark underneath his apartment block in Manhattan.
He pulled into the reserved space beside a red Porsche Carrera, Carmen's car.
He switched off the radio and glanced at his watch.
It had just gone six thirty.
He stifled a yawn.
It had been a long day — twelve hours with Mobuto, eight of those in the United Nations building where Mobuto and his entourage had spent the day.
Mobuto's address to the General Assembly had impressed him.
It had been an eloquent, impassioned speech in which he had promised to uphold the principles of democracy as the new leader of Zimbala.
Yet one aspect of the speech had surprised him.
Mobuto had never once referred to his father by name or attempted to make any apology for the abhorrent crimes that had been committed under his regime.
It was as if he had blocked out that part of his life and was only interested in talking about the future.
The speech was well received by the delegates and a motion was carried unanimously to send a fact-finding team to Zimbala in six months' time to monitor the situation with a view to readmitting the country to the United Nations.
Its original membership, instated  when the United Nations was founded in 1945, had been cancelled in 1956 when Alphonse Mobuto had refused to allow a delegation to visit Zimbala to investigate accounts of mass genocide under his regime.
The motion had particularly pleased Mobuto who was desperate to bring Zimbala back into world affairs.
Whitlock knew that the ambassadors of two Western nations had already promised state visits to Zimbala as soon as it was readmitted to the United Nations.
It had been an historic day for the future of Zimbala — and it was all down to the tactful diplomacy of Jamel Mobuto.
Whitlock had found his animosity towards Mobuto beginning to waver as the day progressed.
He genuinely wanted to bring about change in a country where tens of thousands of its people had been tortured or murdered under his father's regime.
They still treated each other with caution but each was beginning to respect the other's professionalism.
And that was certainly a start.
Whitlock had wanted to remain on duty for the banquet at the United Nations that evening but Kolchinsky had told him to call it a day.
He had reluctantly agreed to go home.
So the first day had passed uneventfully.
But it had been the easiest of the three days.
The following day Mobuto intended to tour the African-American Institute on East 47th Street then go on to visit a high-school deep in the heart of Harlem.
Then, on the third day, he would be a guest at a trade fair held in New Jersey.
Two days of public exposure: a security team's nightmare.
But that was what he was being paid for and after hearing Mobuto at the United Nations he was now more  determined than ever to ensure his safety.
Mobuto was a man with a mission, a Messiah, the future of Zimbala…
Whitlock's thoughts were jolted by a sudden rap on the driver's window.
He looked round sharply then exhaled deeply when he saw the man's face peering in at him.
Joshua Marshall had been the parking-bay attendant ever since the apartment block had been opened eighteen years earlier.
He had grown up in the slums of Harlem and had been a promising middleweight fighter in the late fifties before the lure of alcohol had devastated his career.
He had been dry for the past twenty years.
Whitlock activated the window and clasped his hand over his chest.
‘You almost gave me a heart attack, Joshua.’
‘I thought you'd suffered one, Mr Whitlock.
You haven't moved since you parked the car.’
‘I was thinking, that's all.’
Whitlock removed the keys from the ignition and got out of the car.
‘How long's my wife been back?’
Joshua scratched his head thoughtfully.
‘About an hour.
She seemed in quite a hurry.’
‘Oh?’
Whitlock said, locking the door.
‘Did she say anything?’
‘She didn't see me.’
‘Thanks, Joshua.’
Joshua touched his cap then ambled off back to his hut.
Whitlock used his personal ID card to activate the lift and tapped his foot apprehensively as he waited for it to arrive.
Why had Carmen been in such a hurry?
She never rushed anywhere; she was always very graceful and calm.
What was wrong?
The lift doors parted and he smiled fleetingly at the couple who emerged then stepped inside and pressed the button for the seventh floor.
He paced the lift anxiously until it stopped and the doors parted again.
He strode briskly down the blue-carpeted corridor, the apartment keys already in his hand.
The door opened directly onto the lounge.
Carmen was standing by the window.
Her sister, Rachel, sat on the couch, her hands clasped tightly together.
Her eyes were red.
She had been crying.
He knew then that something had happened to Rosie.
‘Thank God you're back,’ Carmen said as he closed the door behind him.
‘What's wrong?’ he asked, his eyes flickering between the two women.
‘Is it Rosie?’
Rachel bit her lip as she struggled to hold back the tears.
‘She's gone.’
‘What do you mean ‘gone’?’
‘She had a blazing row with Eddie and stormed out of the house,’ Rachel replied.
‘We don't know where she's gone.’
Whitlock sat down.
‘When did this happen?’
‘About two hours ago.
Eddie had just got back from work when they had a row in the kitchen.
She stormed out of the house.
I'm beside myself with worry, C.W. She's only wearing a T-shirt and jeans.
And she doesn't have any money.
I'm sure she's gone back to Times Square.
That's where she's been spending most of her time these last few months.’
‘And one of the conditions of her bail was that she  wasn't to go anywhere near Times Square until her case went to court,’ Carmen said.
Whitlock rubbed his eyes wearily.
‘Where's Eddie now?’
‘He's out looking for her,’ Rachel replied, 'but he doesn't know Times Square.’
‘Do you know any of her regular haunts there?’
Whitlock asked.
Rachel shook her head.
‘Rosie never tells us anything.’
Whitlock got to his feet.
‘Well, I'd better get over there.’
‘It's no use going now,’ Carmen told him.
‘You wouldn't know where Eddie was.
He's phoning every twenty minutes to see if you're back.’
‘When did he last phone?’
‘About ten minutes ago,’ Carmen said, glancing at her watch.
‘I'll go and change,’ Whitlock said.
‘Are you hungry?’
Carmen asked.
‘There's a casserole in the oven.
I can put some out for you before you go.’
‘No, I had a big lunch.
I'll eat later.’
‘C.W.?’
Whitlock paused in the doorway to look back at Rachel.
‘Bring her home.
Please.’
Whitlock nodded grimly and left the room.
Rosie Kruger was in the Rollercoaster, her favourite bar on West 43rd Street, less than a hundred yards away from the heart of Times Square.
She had her  father's pale blue eyes but her long black hair and honey complexion had been inherited from her mother.
She was sixteen-years-old but with her slim, petite figure and attractive features she could have passed for twenty.
Kenny Doyle, the twenty-eight-year-old barman at the Rollercoaster, knew her real age but that had never stopped him from serving her a drink.
He had been a good friend to her and when she walked out on her parents she had made straight for the bar, looking for him.
He understood her plight.
He had run away from his home in Chicago when he was fifteen and still bore the scars from the beating he had received at the hands of his father after his parents had discovered he was gay.
He had never contacted them again.
As far as he was concerned, he had no parents.
Rosie felt the same way about her parents.
Her father was on the brink of alcoholism, a pathetic figure who could only face life if he had a bottle in his hand.
She knew he was on the verge of losing his job.
Not that it really mattered to him any more.
He had lost his dignity years ago.
And her mother was too weak to stop his drinking.
Rosie had been the one who had had to put her father to bed every night for eighteen months while her mother took refuge behind the facade of a sordid affair with her boss, a divorcee.
And then it had only ended after he had decided to go back to his wife.
No, it wasn't only her father who had lost his dignity.
She could remember vividly the first time she had tried dope, the day that she had found out about her mother's affair from one of her classmates.
She had felt cheap and degraded, bitter.
She had shared a joint  with some friends in the toilet.
They each had a few jokes and by the time the roach was flushed away she was already experiencing her first rush, a warm, dreamy sensation that seemed to encompass her whole being.
She never wanted it to end.
A week later she made her first score from a dealer in Times Square.
It made putting her father to bed that bit more bearable.
She had been smoking dope now for the last year, scoring whenever she had saved up enough money from her weekend job at McDonald's.
Then, the previous day, it had all gone wrong.
She had met her connection in the usual place but the moment the deal was struck they were busted by three plainclothes policemen who had been watching them from an unmarked car on the opposite side of the road.
They were both frisked then cuffed and taken into custody.
It was the most humiliating, and frightening, night of her life.
She had never been so glad to see her mother that morning.
All she wanted to do was get out of the cell.
It stank of vomit and urine.
And for those few hours after she got home she found she could talk to her mother properly for the first time in over two years.
There was even a bond of understanding between them.
Then her father had come home.
All he had done was scream abuse at her, accusing her of bringing shame and disgrace on the family.
The double standards appalled her.
It was then she knew she couldn't stay there, not with him.
She knew she was violating her bail conditions by being in the Rollercoaster but she also knew she would be perfectly safe if she kept a low profile.
And she knew Kenny would look after her…
‘What you drinking, sweetheart?’
The voice startled her but when she looked round she winced at the stale smell of alcohol on the man's breath.
He was wearing a grey suit, his tie undone at the throat.
She estimated he was in his early thirties.
‘You're real pretty,’ he said and reached out his hand to touch her face.
‘Back off,’ she snapped and jerked away.
‘Hey, leave my girl alone,’ Doyle said from behind the counter.
The man eyed Doyle contemptuously then muttered something to himself and moved to another table and sat down.
‘Thanks,’ she said, squeezing Doyle's hand.
‘Any time,’ Doyle replied.
‘How's the bourbon?’
‘I'm O K, thanks.
Anyway, I haven't got —‘
‘How many times must I tell you?
The drinks are on the house tonight.’
‘Why are all the best guys either married or…like you?’
‘You're too young to be so cynical,’ Doyle said.
‘You'll meet the right guy some day.’
‘Then what?
Take him home to meet my parents?’ she replied with a look of mock horror.
Doyle chuckled then left her to serve a customer.
She looked slowly around the room.
It wasn't busy, not yet.
But give it another hour.
She was about to reach for her drink when she caught sight of the car out of the corner of her eye as it pulled up on the opposite side of the road — a white BMW, identical to the one her uncle had.
She held her breath as the driver's door opened.
Whitlock got out.
A moment  later Eddie Kruger emerged from the passenger side and closed the door behind him.
‘Kenny!’
Rosie hissed, beckoning the barman towards her.
‘What is it?’
Doyle asked.
‘It's my father.
And he's brought my uncle with him,’ she said, indicating with her head towards the BMW where Whitlock and Kruger were in conversation.
Doyle took a set of keys from his pocket, removed one, and gave it to her.
‘It's for the back door.
You know where it is?’
‘Is it that one next to the men's room?’
He nodded.
‘It leads into an alley behind the bar.
Wait there.
I'll get rid of them, don't worry.
I'll send someone out to call you when they've gone.’
She made her way down the corridor that led off from the bar room, continually glancing over her shoulder, half expecting to see either her father or her uncle behind her.
She reached the door and unlocked it.
Her hands were trembling.
She pushed it open and slipped outside, closing it silently behind her.
A cold wind had picked up since she had arrived at the bar and she rubbed her arms quickly before picking her way through a sea of discarded newspaper to a metal drum and ducked down behind it, her eyes riveted on the door.
She knew Doyle would do his best to protect her but what if they decided to search the place anyway?
Including the alley.
The wind sliced through the alley and blew a sheet of old newspaper against her leg.
She brushed it away then huddled closer to the wall, hugging herself against the cold.
A stray mongrel  appeared at the end of the alley, its body gaunt from years of neglect.
It sniffed the air then made straight for the drum.
It stopped abruptly when it saw Rosie, an uncertainty shadowing its haunted eyes.
Then it moved closer and began to scratch frantically at the foot of the bin.
A rat suddenly darted out from a hole in the side of the drum and she had to bite back the scream that rose in her throat.
It scurried over to a pile of old newspapers with the mongrel in close attendance.
The mongrel tore savagely at the newspapers and the rat fled further down the alley, desperate for sanctuary.
Rosie lost sight of it when it disappeared behind a cardboard box and she turned her attention back to the door.
She inhaled sharply when she saw the figure there.
It was the man in the grey suit who had tried to pick her up earlier.
He was looking at the bin but she didn't know whether he had seen her or not.
‘You can come out now,’ he said, beckoning towards her with his finger.
‘They've gone.’
She didn't move.
Why had Kenny sent him out to tell her?
Or had he?
Had the man overheard her talking to Kenny?
She was frightened, very frightened.
‘I know you're behind the drum,’ he said, taking a step towards it.
‘I told you, they've gone.
You're safe now.’
She slowly got to her feet, her eyes wide with fear.
The cold didn't bother her any more.
He held out a hand towards her.
She instinctively shrunk back against the wall, her hands clasped tightly against her chest.
His smile was chilling.
She opened her mouth but she couldn't speak.
Her throat was dry; her lips  were dry.
He stopped in front of her and wrenched her hands away from her chest.
She wanted to run but her legs wouldn't move.
She wanted to scream but no sound came from her throat.
A faint sneer of satisfaction touched the corners of his mouth.
She squeezed her eyes shut as she felt his hand slip under her T-shirt.
‘Leave her alone!’
The man looked round sharply at the figure who had emerged silently from inside the bar.
He was wearing a pair of faded blue jeans, a white shirt and a black leather jacket.
A faint scar ran the length of his left cheek.
‘You'll get your ass out of here if you know what's good for you,’ the man snarled menacingly.
Bernard glanced at Rosie.
‘Go inside.
The two men have gone.’
‘Like hell you are,’ the man snarled and grabbed her arm.
She raked his face with her fingernails.
He cried out in pain and stumbled back against the wall.
She jerked her arm free and ran to where Bernard was standing.
‘Inside,’ Bernard ordered, indicating the door with his head.
Her eyes flickered momentarily between the two men then she pulled open the door and hurried inside.
‘You're going to pay for that, you son-of-a-bitch,’ the man hissed through clenched teeth as he wiped the blood from his cheek with the back of his hand.
Bernard eyed the man contemptuously then dropped his cigarette and ground it underfoot.
The man lunged clumsily at Bernard who ducked his wild  punch and landed a vicious one of his own, catching him painfully in the kidney.
The man stumbled against the wall and Bernard followed through with two more crippling kidney punches, dropping the man to his knees.
He grabbed the man's hair and slammed his face against the wall.
The man slumped into an unconscious heap at Bernard's feet.
Bernard brushed his hands together then walked back to the door.
It swung open as he was about to reach out for the handle.
Doyle stood in the doorway, a baseball bat clenched tightly in his right hand.
‘It's O K,’ Bernard reassured him.
‘He won't touch the girl again tonight.’
Doyle peered at the crumpled figure.
‘Bastard.
I was ready to take his head off when Rosie told me what had happened.’
‘You know him?’
‘Never seen him before,’ Doyle replied then held open the door for Bernard.
‘Thanks for helping her.
Most people around here would have just looked the other way.’
‘Is she your girl?’
Bernard asked as they walked back to the bar room.
‘Just a friend.
A good friend.’
The waitress who had been covering for Doyle behind the bar eyed the baseball bat questioningly when he returned.
‘I didn't have to do anything,’ Doyle replied, placing the bat under the counter again.
‘This gentleman took care of the situation.’
He looked at Bernard.
‘The least I can do is buy you a drink.’
‘A Diet Cola if you have it,’ Bernard replied then  eased himself onto the stool beside Rosie.
‘Are you alright?’
She nodded.
‘I don't know how I can ever thank you.
If you hadn't come along when you did…’ she trailed off as she struggled to hold back the tears.
‘Would you like another drink?’ he asked, indicating her empty glass.
‘Please,’ she replied softly then looked at him for the first time since he had sat down.
‘I don't even know your name.’
‘Marc Giresse,’ he replied, quoting the name on his passport.
‘I'm Rosie Kruger.’
She looked round as Doyle returned with the Diet Cola.
‘I was just saying, if you hadn't sent Mr Giresse out when you did I hate to think what would have happened to me.’
‘I didn't send him out,’ Doyle replied.
‘I was about to come out myself.’
Rosie and Doyle looked at Bernard simultaneously.
‘I was at the table behind you,’ Bernard said to Rosie.
‘I saw what happened when that guy tried to pick you up.
Then when he followed you down the corridor I thought I'd better make sure you were alright.’
‘How did you know about my father and my uncle?’
‘I overheard you two talking,’ Bernard replied with a sheepish grin.
‘It's a bad habit of mine.
I tend to do it when I'm bored.’
‘I'm sure glad you did,’ Rosie replied with a smile.
Doyle's eyes flickered to the nearest table behind Rosie.
It was occupied by a young couple in their early twenties.
Although he didn't know them, he could  have sworn they had been there for the past hour.
And they were sitting on the only two chairs at the table.
He looked at Bernard, frowned, then glanced round sharply when he heard someone calling him from the end of the counter.
‘A drink for the lady, when you have a minute,’ Bernard said as Doyle turned to go.
‘Sure,’ Doyle replied then went off to serve the customer.
‘Giresse?’
Rosie said thoughtfully.
‘Is that French?’
Bernard nodded.
‘You don't sound French.
You don't look it either.
You're very swarthy.’
‘My father was French.
I was born in Tarabulus.’
‘Where's that?’ she asked.
‘The Lebanon.’
A sly smile touched the comers of her mouth.
‘You're not a terrorist, are you?’
‘Sure,’ Bernard replied then shook his head.
‘You Americans never cease to amaze me.
Everyone has to be neatly packaged into defined groups.
If you're Russian you must be a Communist.
If you're Colombian you must be a drug dealer.
If you're Libyan or Lebanese you must be a terrorist.’
‘I was only joking,’ she said with a grin.
‘I know.
I only wish I could say the same about your politicians.’
Bernard took a sip of the Diet Cola then leaned his elbows on the counter.
‘I'm a humble businessman, that's all.
Meat packaging — far less glamorous than being a terrorist, I'm afraid.’
‘Do you know…any terrorists?’
‘You meet lots of different kinds of people in the  Lebanon,’ Bernard replied then dismissed the topic with a vague flick of his hand.
‘Are you a runaway?’
The question caught Rosie by surprise.
Normally she would have clammed up at that juncture.
She made it a point to tell people as little about herself as possible.
She never shared her inner thoughts with anyone, not even her friends at school who had come to regard her as something of an enigma.
Yet she felt completely at ease with Bernard.
It was a feeling she had never had before, not even with Kenny, and he was probably the best friend she ever had.
She felt as if she could trust Bernard.
And she had never trusted anyone before in her life.
Part of her was frightened.
It was a new experience for her to want to open up to someone, especially a man; but another part of her was relieved to have found a kindred spirit she could confide in.
‘Sorry, I didn't mean to pry,’ Bernard said, noticing her distant expression.
‘No, you weren't prying,’ she replied with a quick smile.
‘I guess I am a runaway.
I left home tonight.’
‘It's a start,’ Bernard said with a smile.
He held up his glass.
‘Welcome to the club.’
‘Were you also a runaway?’ she asked excitedly.
He nodded.
‘I knew it.
A kindred spirit,’ she said softly to herself.
‘Pardon?’
‘Nothing,’ she said then looked up as Doyle returned with her bourbon.
‘Mr Giresse was also a runaway.
Small world.’
‘Very small,’ Doyle replied tersely then placed the  bourbon in front of her.
His eyes darted towards Bernard.
There was something about the man he didn't trust.
And his instincts were rarely wrong.
‘Where you from?’
‘Beirut,’ Bernard replied, holding Doyle's stare.
He suddenly smiled.
‘How much is the drink?’
‘I'm paying for Rosie's drinks tonight,’ Doyle replied quickly.
‘Please, I insist,’ Bernard said then took a five-dollar note from his wallet and placed it on the counter.
‘Have one yourself.’
‘No, thank you,’ Doyle replied and left the note on the counter when he walked off to serve another customer.
‘What's wrong with your friend?’
Bernard asked, slipping the note back into his wallet.
Rosie shrugged.
‘He gets like this sometimes.
I suppose I would, too, if I had to serve all the creeps that come in here every night.’
‘Thank you,’ Bernard retorted.
‘You know what I mean,’ she replied then saw the smile on his face.
‘Stop teasing me.’
His face suddenly became serious.
‘Have you got somewhere to stay tonight?’
She instinctively looked across at Doyle.
‘I was hoping Kenny could put me up for a few days until I'd sorted things out with my parents.
But he can't.
He's got someone staying with him.
There's a couple of friends I know who might be able to give me a bed for the night.
I'll try them.’
‘And what if they can't?’
She shrugged.
‘I'll find a flop house somewhere.
I've  got a few bucks on me.
But don't tell Kenny: I told him I was broke.’
‘That's crazy.
You can't go walking around New York by yourself at this time of night.
Look, I've got a spare room.
You can use it if you want.’
‘Thanks, but…’ she trailed off with an awkward shrug.
‘I mean, I don't even know you.’
‘Likewise,’ Bernard replied.
He bit his lip thoughtfully.
‘I'll tell you what.
Call your friends and see if they can put you up for the night.
If they can't you can either stay at the flat or else I'll give you some money and drop you off at a hotel.’
‘Why are you doing this?’
‘My father raised me.
I never knew my mother.
He was the only family I had.
He died when I was fourteen.
So I ran off to Beirut to avoid being put into an orphanage.
The first night there I was accosted by three men.
I managed to get away but,’ he paused and touched the scar on his cheek, 'they left me with a memento.
It looks a lot better on me than it would on you.
You got off lightly in the alley tonight.
Don't push your luck.’
She pondered his words then glanced at the pay phone in the corner of the bar.
‘You got any quarters?’
Bernard rifled through the change pouch in his wallet and handed her three quarters.
‘Is that enough?’
She nodded then climbed off her stool and crossed the room to the phone.
She dialled the first number: no reply.
Then she tried the second.
It was answered by a man.
Three's company, she said to herself and hung up.
When she turned round she found Doyle standing in front of her.
‘Here, take this,’ he said, pushing a ten-dollar note into her hand.
‘What's this for?’
‘Taxi fare to my place.
You can stay there tonight.’
‘But what about that guy?’
‘He'll understand,’ Doyle replied.
‘Have you phoned to tell him I'm coming over?’
‘I tried but he's not in.
He'll be at a club.’
‘I appreciate the offer, Kenny, but I can't stay with you guys.
It wouldn't be right.’
‘Why not?’
Doyle demanded defensively.
‘You can pad out on the sofa.’
‘It just wouldn't be right,’ she replied with a shrug and slipped the money back into his pocket.
‘So where are you going to stay?’
‘I'll find a crash pad somewhere,’ she said, trying to reassure him.
‘I heard that Lebanese guy offer you a room at his place.
Don't go, Rosie.
There's something pseudo about him.’
‘Yeah, what?’ she demanded.
‘I don't know.
It's just a gut feeling, that's all.’
‘Oh, really?’ she retorted sharply.
‘He's been a perfect gentleman ever since I met him.
And you don't find many of them in this dive.’
‘He's trouble, Rosie.’
She shook her head angrily.
‘You've been acting weird ever since he started talking to me.
What's really bugging you, Kenny?
Are you jealous that we're getting along so well?’
‘Jealous?’
Doyle replied in disbelief.
‘Grow up, Rosie.
I'm worried about you, that's all.’
‘Yeah, well, don't bother.
I can look after myself.’
She spun on her heels and walked back to where Bernard was sitting.
‘I'll take you up on that offer of a bed if it's still going.’
‘Sure,’ Bernard replied.
‘Can we go, now?’
Bernard looked round at her.
‘Now?
It's only eight thirty.’
‘Then let's go somewhere else.’
She glanced up at Doyle as he returned behind the bar.
‘This place has got distinctly chilly in the last couple of minutes.’
Bernard shrugged.
‘You'll have to recommend somewhere.
I'm a stranger in these parts.’
‘I know lots of places,’ she retorted then glared at Doyle before striding out of the bar.
Bernard watched her leave.
It was beyond his wildest expectations.
All he had intended to do was keep tabs on her in case he needed a hostage after the hit on Mobuto.
Whitlock's niece, the perfect weapon to foil UNACO.
His American contact had told him where to find her.
He didn't know his name.
He only knew him by his codeword, Seabird.
No, he couldn't have asked for it to have turned out better.
He pushed the Diet Cola away from him and climbed off the stool.
It was then that he noticed Doyle watching him.
He allowed himself a faint smile of satisfaction then slipped the five-dollar note under Rosie's glass and left the bar.
Whitlock closed the door behind Eddie and Rachel Kruger then returned to the lounge and slumped dejectedly onto the sofa.
‘You did your best, C.W.,’ Carmen said, massaging his shoulders.
‘It wasn't enough, was it?’
Whitlock replied.
‘Between us we must have been to every bar within a mile radius of Times Square.
Nothing.’
‘That could be a good thing in itself.
If someone is shielding her then she'll probably have a bed for the night.’
‘God, I hope so,’ Whitlock said then got to his feet and moved to the balcony where he looked out over the illuminated New York skyline.
‘It's almost midnight, C.W.,’ Carmen said from the doorway.
‘We've both got to be up early in the morning.’
‘I know,’ Whitlock replied but made no attempt to move away from the railing.
‘You've done everything you could to find her.
She's on her own now.’
‘I still say we should have called the police.’
‘We've been through this already.
Eddie and Rachel decided against it.
We have to respect that.
She's their daughter, not ours.’
‘If she was our daughter she wouldn't be in this mess,’ Whitlock retorted.
‘Wouldn't she?’
Whitlock looked round sharply at her then conceded the point with a shrug of the shoulders.
‘Come on, let's go to bed.’
‘Take care of yourself, kid,’ Whitlock said softly then went inside and closed the sliding door behind him.
Robert Bailey was obsessed with security.
He drove to work in a bulletproof Mercedes 500SL, changing his route daily.
His personal bodyguards were always armed.
His wife and two teenage daughters were ferried about by an armed chauffeur.
And his house in the Georgetown suburb of Washington was a virtual fortress.
Tripwires lined the top of the perimeter wall and armed dog-handlers patrolled the grounds twenty-four hours a day.
Closed circuit television cameras had been installed in every room and were monitored by guards from a control centre in the basement of the house — every room, that is, except his study.
It was a soundproof, windowless room at the end of the corridor on the second floor.
The only access was through a sliding metal door which could only be activated by punching a code into the bellpush on the adjacent wall.
He changed the combination daily.
Nobody, not even his family, was allowed inside the room.
It contained his personal computer, which was linked to computers at both the Pentagon and the CIA headquarters in Langley.
Hundreds of secret programs that had been built up by the CIA over the years, including data sensitive enough to topple the heads of half a dozen European governments if they were ever to fall into the wrong hands.
With this in mind, he had devised more security measures to thwart any would-be intruder that managed to get past the guards.
The computer itself could only be activated by an access code known solely to Bailey.
If the incorrect code was programmed in it would activate a canister of lethal nerve gas which was  secreted in the ceiling directly above the door.
Death would result in less than ten seconds.
But he had provided a double failsafe mechanism for himself in case he accidently pressed the wrong key while accessing the code.
The nerve gas would only be released if the incorrect code was programmed twice into the computer.
He was, after all, only human.
After feeding in the access code he sat back and stifled a yawn.
It was already one in the morning.
He was exhausted.
He had been up seventeen hours.
His wife and daughters had long since gone to bed.
They were accustomed to his irregular hours.
But they all shared his ambition to become head of the CIA within the next five years.
And he knew he had the backing of the President and most of the powerful Republican congressmen on Capitol Hill.
It was only a question of time.
He tapped another code into the computer and moments later a dossier appeared on the VDU.
The name on it was Jean-Jacques Bernard.
He erased all the existing data and replaced it with a single line written in capital letters: TO BE TERMINATED AFTER THE ASSASSINATION OF JAMEL MOBUTO.