

A New View of Robert Owen: Owenites and Owenism
Westward, lo! the land, if brighter, was not bright enough.
Having addressed the President and the Congress, and having conducted what must have been one of the first lecture tours of the United States, Owen set up a village of Co-operation at New Harmony, in Indiana.
The name promised much, but only to deceive.
Certainly, the village was co-operative in structure.
Indeed, in the range of kinds of organisations recognisably co-operative, it must be placed at the extreme.
Property was held in common, work was collective, and produce shared.
If individual rights in property are an absolute impediment to the institution of Utopia or even, less pretentiously, to the promotion of the good life, then at New Harmony there was no such impediment.
All owned everything, none owned anything; and the experiment failed.
As Cole records, it settled down finally into an agricultural colony of individually owned and worked farms.
It would of course be wrong to conclude that this particular form of co-operative, the community co-operative, is bound to fail.
Kibbutzim, to which it bears most resemblance, do not; nor do the traditional Eskimo communities.
One is, nevertheless, bound to suppose that it is only in extreme conditions that people can be  expected to volunteer the suppression of individuality to the extent that the more extreme forms of co-operative require: only, that is in short, where a life of one's own would not be supportable.
Nor does the failure of New Harmony, as of other villages of co-operation, allow the conclusion that the idea of common ownership is misconceived; and that its application elsewhere — as in many of the new wave of industrial co-operatives in the United Kingdom — is likely to prove mistaken.
But it does at least prompt the question whether the suppression in them, not now of individuality but of individual interest in the sense of ownership, is only likely to be volunteered where the amount of that interest is seen by the prospective volunteer as marginal to his other interests, concerns and obligations.
For people leading lives of their own, those other interests, concerns and obligations will often be compelling.
They will include, most pressingly, doing one's best for one's nearest and dearest.
There will, of course, always be those whose motivation in the cause will over-rule other considerations, whether because the motivation is founded in ideological conviction, or because other considerations are weak, or both.
But a view of Co-operation which admitted only those who are thus motivated would make it an exceptional and exclusive creed to which could subscribe only those for whom Co-operation was itself the end and not the means to a better life, to one which enhanced what Dahrendorf calls a man's life chances.
And that that would not do.
If Co-operation is to appeal broadly, it must be a broad church.
It is for all people, as people are and as they behave, for imperfect people living lives of their own in an imperfect world.
In Britain meanwhile, precisely because it was imprecise, Owenism could appeal broadly, and Owenites grew in number.
To the masses which the French Revolution had made politically aware and on which the Industrial Revolution was imposing new and appalling burdens while increasing exponentially the capacity to create wealth, Owen's new view was of a society which had realised their aspirations.
As inspirational pronouncement rather than an operational blueprint, not only did it give expression to and authority for the idea that a fairer, juster society should be created, as the inalienable rights of man required; but more, it asserted that thanks to machinery powered by steam it could be.
If liberty and equality were birth-rights, it remained only to establish fraternity.: for, fear having been cast out not by perfect love but by plenty, all men could now become brothers and women sisters.
Schiller had  already written the words, in his Ode to joy ; and Beethoven had provided the music.
This, at its most exalted, represented the aspiration of Owenism; and though few Owenites would have heard the song, when the time came for the countless host to stream in through gates of pearl, that surely is what they could have sung as they marched.
When, indeed: but practical measures were the immediate need; and it was in the absence in America of Owen himself that Owenism emerged as a response to that need and Owenites as those who formulated the response.
It took various forms.
Seeking to use the master's own model, some Owenites established co-operative communities.
That road to Co-operation proved, certainly in the United Kingdom, as well as in the United States, to be a dead-end; and it is convenient to trace the whole of its course before turning to the more significant developments started in his absence.
In 1826 at Orbiston in Lanark, and as a direct consequence of his report to the county, a co-operative community was set up.
In 1827, for reasons which had nothing to do with the success or failure of the enterprise, the land-owner sold the estate and the community was dispersed.
Other communities followed.
Of them, Cole points to two for special attention.
The one, established in 1831 at Ralahine in Ireland, survived for two years before the estate was sold to pay the owner's gambling debts.
Again, the community was dispersed.
The other, at East Tytherley in Hampshire, was called Harmony Hall.
That harmonic strain again; and again it was to have a dying fall.
Owen himself served at different times as governor of the community.
Kept going only by subsidies, it was wound up in 1846 in circumstances which seem to have been anything but harmonious.
So Owen's high road to the regeneration of society through the co-operative community petered out to its disillusioning end.
Other developments, more modest in their expectations and deriving from the particular perception this or that group might have of the way in which Owen's new view could be related to its own grievance or apprehension or aspiration, proceeded in parallel, propagated largely by the rapidly growing radical press which included a number of journals advocating Owenite ideas.
Some co-operative stores were started, with the immediate object of consumer protection but also to accumulate money with which to finance a co-operative community.
So, too, were a number of producer co-operatives by workpeople determined to set up in business  themselves whether, by competing with master manufacturers, to reinforce the effect of a strike; or to counter a lock-out; or in response to wage-cuts; or simply to create jobs.
After the repeal in 1824 of the Combination Acts, neither trade unions nor strikes were illegal.
Perhaps the most significant fact to record about the creation so early in their legitimate lives by trade unions of producer co-operatives is that their purpose was so very largely tactical.
It was already a specifically trade union response to the single most important question trade unions face: the question of maintaining and improving the wages paid to their members by employers.
Thus, though it demonstrates the existence from the outset a common source of inspiration in Owenism for both trade unionism and co-operation, it demonstrates also that trade unionism saw Producer Co-operation not as an alternative and preferable way of organising manufacture and hence one to be adopted generally, not in short as a prime purpose, but as an occasional weapon.
And, as the rest of the century was to show, while as a consumer a workman might be a co-operator, at his place of work with rare exceptions he might not: even in the consumer movement's own factories.
At work, he could only be a trade unionist.
The evidence is plain, the witnesses are persuasive.
By 1829, the year of Owen's return from America, the organisation by John Doherty of workers in cotton spinning into his Grand National Union of the United Kingdom had marked an attempt to make trade union structure national, whereas hitherto it had been local.
Almost immediately, Doherty went on to try to make it general and so, of course, capable of calling for a general strike.
His National Association for the Protection of Labour sought to organise workers employed in a comprehensive range of trades: mining, building, textiles, pottery and others.
In 1830, the National Association held its first conference.
Others followed in 1831.
Doherty is described by Cole as an ardent Owenite; but though he records him as advocating ‘co-operative self-employment far and wide wherever the workers became organised’, he nevertheless identifies the National Association as a purely trade union body.
And indeed, its function was explicit in its title, its purpose, the purpose at its most modest of trade unionism within a system of production comprising employers and employees, capital and labour, as separate entities which though necessary to one another were yet ultimately opposed.
That purpose was, the Webbs record, expressly to resist reductions but not to ask for advances in pay.
So it looks as though at the very beginning of the 1830s, trade unionism was already disposed to settle into the primary role which it was fully and consciously to adopt later in the century, a role which would be ameliorative rather than revolutionary.
As a leader among the  Owenites , Doherty may not have looked so far towards the promised land of Owen's splendid but indistinct new view; but his perception, though narrower, was clearer.
Two things happened, however, to divert trade unionism from the adoption of that role and to lead it instead into what has been called its revolutionary period, one which for a time made the ownership and control of industries by the people who worked in them its main objective, which sought in short to displace the organisation of industry on the capitalist model by an industrial co-operative commonwealth.
The first was that, with the passage in 1832 of the Reform Bill came the full realisation that parliamentary reform had done nothing for the emergent working class, except to isolate it.
The second was Owen's declaration that there was another way, easy and immediate; a message which, in the collapse of the generally uncritical expectations attending the successful struggle to secure the passage of the Bill must have been all the more persuasive.
For it was in 1833 that Owen appeared at the London Co-operative Congress to advocate the creation of the Grand Moral Union of the Productive Classes.
He had just persuaded the Operative Builders Union to restructure itself as the Grand National Guild of Builders.
In effect the people working in the industry were to take it over and to run it as an industrial co-operative, organised nationally.
Now he sought to extend the idea to the whole of industry.
Note again the title and functions.
The Union was to be ‘Moral’: that is to say it would look, as Owen had always looked, beyond the immediate need to protect working people against exploitation of the work-place.
It aspired to the reconstitution of the socio-economic order on what he regarded as a moral basis: in short, as an industrial democracy.
And the new order was to comprehend not only labour, not only working classes, but the productive classes.
The difference is significant.
It distinguishes the classes of society not by reference to the contrasted roles of employer and employee, but rather by reference to their usefulness.
There were those who were productive, or industrious.
There were those who were not.
The strong  probability is that in this, his latest revise of his view of society, Owen continued to place master-manufacturers among the productive and industrious.
We may take it that the utilitarian in him could accept with Ricardo's labour theory of value his hostility to landlords, who might be regarded as unproductive and bone-idle, and share with him a reluctance to extend that hostility to master-manufacturers.
For so many years himself a master-manufacturer at New Lanark, he might fairly be supposed still to see virtue in those among whom he had been numbered.
And since the master-manufacturer also financed the provision of land, buildings, machinery and equipment he was — or had been — also what would come to be called a capitalist.
Yet, the institution of the industrial co-operative commonwealth required that labour should take control of the means of production; and for Owen, for whom the violence and destruction such as had attended the French Revolution were calamitous, the change to control by labour must happen peacefully.
The wish had to be father to the belief, the belief to the conviction.
We shall consider the outcome in more detail later.
Here, it is enough to note that the adoption, largely at Owen's prompting, by the trade union movement of the strategic objective of organising manufacturing industry in industrial co-operatives, of adopting Co-operation for its own sake so as to make a revolutionary change in the constitutional structure of society, ended almost as soon as it had begun.
For the opportunity, if it existed at all, to make such a change would have occurred only in the context of a much more broadly based revolutionary movement.
Such a context might have presented itself during the struggle to secure the passage of the Reform Bill.
In the event it did not; and by the time Owen had led trade unionism to adopt a revolutionary programme, that struggle was over anyway.
So for a short while the two movements, Co-operation and trade unionism, had fused.
And, almost at once, they separated.
The Grand Moral Union of the Productive Classes reverted to an organisation having the characteristic objectives of a trade union: the Grand National Consolidated Trade Union.
Its avowed purposes still extended beyond those of protecting the interests of its members, as employees: that is to say, their wages and conditions of employment.
In language which retained the authentic ring of Robert Owen, it still sought far-reaching social and political change, ‘a different order of things, in which the really  useful and intelligent part of society only shall have the direction of its affairs; in which industry and virtue shall meet their just distinction and reward, and vicious idleness its merited contempt and destruction.’
The co-operative element had, however, disappeared.
Cole says simply: ‘The Trade Unions and the Owenite Co-operators slipped apart; and Owen, full of his new creature’, that is, the GNCTU, ‘seems to have lost interest in the more narrowly co-operative side of the movement’.
Certainly, the change within a few months from the Grand Moral Union of the Productive Classes to the Grand National Consolidated Trade Union suggests great confusion of purpose.
Was it to establish a quasi-religious movement, one of such moral earnestness as would in the minds of the Owens among the Owenites exercise a compelling influence for beneficial change, one which would establish first alternative and exemplary societies where amity and reason would prevail, and hence would point inevitably to the creation of a co-operative commonwealth?
Or was it to organise workpeople to fight the most immediate battles?
Looking back at the tangled web of confused events we can see that the answer had already emerged.
If until 1832 the working class seen in a Marxist perspective as a proletariat was emergent and potential, if it had yet fully to identify itself, the Reform Bill of that year finally distinguished it from the rest of society.
For while by enfranchising the new towns it gave the commercial middle class, and with it the master-manufacturers, a say on the conduct of Government, it totally disenfranchised the working man.
The working class had been defined, by exclusion; the master-manufacturers, who had Ricardo's blessing, had been assimilated to the landlords, who had not; and so promoted into privilege.
The two component parts of Owen's productive classes had been placed on the opposite sides of a divide; and their separation into ‘them and us’ was now so far completed as to have become irreversible.
And how now are we to see Owen?
The change from the propagandist playing his derivative educational theme throughout A New View of Society to the leader, however temporary, of a trade union movement already inspirationally Owenite and now ready on his prompting to aspire to the control of the means of production and provision, was profound.
Not, of course, that he abandoned that amiable judgment, assumed in A New View , of unspoiled human nature, nor that unshakeable conviction that co-operative communities would bring out the best in it.
But it is not  on that judgment nor on that conviction that his place among the first of the heroes of Socialism or Co-operation depends.
The judgment we know to be mistaken, the case it supports too drily utilitarian.
And the conviction refers to an ultimately retrogressive form of co-operation: retrogressive because it requires too great a suppression of individuality, too great a forfeiture of a life of one's own; and hence, justifiable only by sheer necessity.
So it is upon his perception of trade unions operating as industrial co-operatives and thus reconstituting society as an industrial democracy, that his hero's place depends, a perception which trade unionism was so quickly to abandon.
In an age lacking social imagination the persuasion, however firm, of Owenism, could not remove mountains.
Still, the struggle within Parliament for the reform of Parliament came near to being a revolution on whose comprehensive and rolling tumbril Owenites and Owenism could have expected to secure, as a preliminary to the reconstitution of the country as an industrial democracy, a terminal passage for the old corrupt order.
It remains to consider why the struggle stopped short of revolution; and why when it did, Owenism lapsed.
A NEW VIEW OF ROBERT OWEN: REFORM OR REVOLUTION
The choice, then, between reform or revolution, involved two contemporaneous strands of development, the one towards political the other towards industrial democracy.
With the passage in 1832 of the Reform Bill, the first was to achieve a measure of progress which, though in itself partial and disappointing, nevertheless directed the country which had stood on the edge of revolution along the road of parliamentary reform to complete political democracy.
The second strand, industrial democracy, had found its advocates in Robert Owen and his followers.
In its most heroic and grandiose form, it proposed no less than this: that working people should take over the industries which employed them and organise those industries into nationwide co-operatives, the whole to be in the charge of one, all-inclusive trade union.
Revolutionary this certainly was in concept, for it sought to displace what came to be called Capitalism by industrial collectivism, to secure that industry should be run by the workpeople for the workpeople, and through the agency of trade unionism.
As we have seen, for a short while the two main instruments of working-class aspiration, Co-operation and trade unionism, were fused together, at Robert Owen's prompting.
In  the ignominious collapse of the grand scheme the two separated, each to accommodate itself to the developing capitalist system, each to find its own way forward within the system and as part of it.
And in that separation, in that accommodation, there was no place for industrial democracy.
My present purpose is to try to establish the reasons.
Though there had been in the years leading up to 1832 theoretical choice between these two ways forward, towards political democracy or towards industrial democracy, few would have distinguished the two so sharply before the passage of the Reform Bill.
For most of the leaders among the Owenites the distinction only showed itself in their recognition that the Bill had done nothing for working people; that since the prime need, as they saw it, was to act directly to remove the evils of a system which grievously oppressed the lives of working people, the Bill had been at best an irrelevance, at worst a distraction.
Yet history was right and they were wrong.
The choice was only apparent: for, as we shall see, the assumptions on which Owen and his followers founded their intentions were insecure in themselves.
That they were also impossible as a basis for the next and crucial stage of the Industrial Revolution could have entered into the judgment only of the most prescient.
So, while for the first of these two failures Owen may be criticised, for the second he must be excused.
And there is, of course, another and clinching reason why the choice was apparent rather than real.
Because it is the guarantee of the most important freedom, the freedom of expression and representation of opinion, political democracy ought to have come first.
To the observation that, nevertheless, industrial democracy could have accompanied or even preceded it, the answer is: yes — but only by violent and successful revolution.
For, where the advance towards political democracy succeeded against entrenched opposition because opinion insisted, the proposals for industrial democracy were premature.
There was never a consensus for them, as there was for political reform, a consensus of middle class and lower class opinion.
True, revolution was for a time a strong possibility, if not a probability; and as true, such a revolution would of course have been seen as the means to industrial democracy by those who sought it.
But that possibility arose essentially out of the attempt to frustrate the demand for political reform.
Now it is sometimes argued that the Reform Bill was deliberately framed so as to preclude the threat of a revolution founded on such  an alignment, one in which a middle-class bourgeoisie would have provided the leadership and the lower classes the sheer mass, the numbers needed to carry it out; and shrewdly calculated to concede just so much as was needed to reduce to a manageable scale the gathering political unrest which might have led to just such a convulsion.
Certainly there was the precedent of 1789.
None could have failed to recall that it was the lawyers, capitalists and businessmen of the Third Estate of the French States General who led the masses against the privileged orders.
Given that precedent, the institution by Thomas Attwood, a banker, of the Birmingham Political Union of the Lower and Middle Classes, to be followed at once by the creation all over the country of other political unions, must have seemed ominous.
Strikes by Doherty ‘s National Union of Operative Spinners, and in the coal fields, greatly alarmed Peel, at the Home Office; and, in what were to be the dying days of the Tory administration, he looked unsuccessfully for a legal answer to what he called ‘the constitution and acts of a confederacy calculated in its immediate effects to disturb the peace of the manufacturing districts, and capable, if allowed to gain strength and consistency, of being converted at once into an open resistance to the law.’
Picketing — or, as he has it, ‘picquetting’— he considered an ‘abominable tyranny’, not yet revolution, even as seen from Peel's Home Office in 1830, but well on the way to it.
Peel reckoned with the prospect of violent conflict between the Government and the trade unions; and went so far as to enquire into the practicability of organizing the middle classes against them.
So he for one saw a need to separate the middle from the lower classes.
But it was the Whigs who won the general election; and they returned to office committed to parliamentary reform, the measure which for all the variety of the causes of social unrest and of the disorders they prompted, came increasingly to be the focus of the general demand for change.
As the political assimilative into which were absorbed the opinions, convictions and energies which would otherwise have been available to impel Owenism and so to maximise its chances of attaining its goal, industrial democracy, the struggle to secure the passage of the Reform Bill demands attention.
When Peel heard Lord John Russell's introduction of the Bill on 1 March 1831, he realised that where he had meant to divide the middle from the lower classes, the measure proposed by the Whigs would unite them in support of the new Government.
For the Tory Opposition, the only hope was that the Bill might be delayed; that, with the  delay, the working man would come to realise that, if the Bill became law, he would have been wholly disenfranchised; and that, with the realisation, the lower classes would unite with the aristocracy to secure the rejection of the proposals contained in the Bill and their replacement by others much more modest.
But there was no delay.
And the main reason was that reactionary and factious opposition led the Government to seek and obtain an immediate dissolution of Parliament.
If there had ever been any chance that the Whigs might lose the support of the great mass of the population, the poor, the unpropertied, the emergent working class, that possibility had now gone.
The ensuing general election returned a House of Commons in which the reformers were in a large majority.
And the effect was not only to strengthen the Reformers' parliamentary position.
It was also to assimilate the various discontents and disaffections into the one comprehensive sense of outrage, and further to inflame opinion so that what had already been enthusiasm, to the point of violence, for reform, now became passion.
Even so, the Tories continued uncompromisingly to oppose.
The Commons might have its reforming majority.
The Lords could still throw the Bill out — and it did, on its second reading.
Thereupon, widespread political rioting and arson, directed at Tory notables, broke out.
But for the fact that the rioters supported the Government, itself widely believed to regard the riots with tacit approval, it could have been said that the country was on the point of revolution.
Some indeed, Ramsey recounts, supposed as they saw the fires in rioting Bristol reflected in the night sky, that the English revolution had begun.
Re-introduced, the Bill this time got its second reading in the Lords.
But in Committee, an amendment was carried against the Government.
The Prime Minister, Lord Grey, asked the King to create fifty peers.
The King refused; and Grey resigned.
It was now for the Tories to try to form a Government.
However, William IV considered his faith pledged to the enactment of a statute similar in essentials to the Whig Government's Bill.
Eventually, Wellington undertook the task of forming an administration to this end.
Now the agitation in the country and the violent disorder it threatened could be directed against the Government.
Little matter that reform would win.
It was offensive that a party should be so unprincipled as first to defeat the Government on a matter of fundamental constitutional importance; and, having done so, should then take office on condition  that it passed the measure.
Anyway, none could have confidence in such a Government.
The Times advocated revolt.
People began threatening to refuse to pay taxes.
Francis Place contemplated the steps needed to induce a revolution.
In the event, Wellington failed to form a government.
The Whigs, the party of reform, were back in office, but now with a promise from the King to create as many peers as might be needed to secure the passage of their Bill.
The King was not called upon to honour his promise.
The dissenting Tory peers stayed away; and the Bill was passed.
So, was the great Reform Bill of 1832, as some have seen it, no more than the minimal concession to undeniable demand for change?
If that is what it turned out to be, it is certainly not what those most concerned to secure or prevent the passage of the Bill thought at the time .
The Tories saw it as a constitutional disaster without parallel, the Whigs as a famous and hard-won victory for a bold and far-reaching measure against the reactionary defence of an out-dated and corrupt constitution.
That Peel, leading the Tory opposition, recognised that the Whigs' Bill would in the short run unite the middle and lower classes in support of the Government is one thing; to infer from this that Grey and his team deliberately set out both to counter the threat of revolution and to do so in a way which would ultimately isolate the working class, quite another.
The better view is that the Whigs were for Reform with various degrees of conviction and for a variety of reasons, ranging from that political expediency which saw in it a cause which would get and keep the Tories out, to that of moral principle.
When Lord John Russell declared that ‘the whisper of a faction could not prevail over the voice of a nation’, he was appealing to moral principle; and if, when that appeal was made, it chimed in with political expediency it was only because factious and sometimes unprincipled Tory opposition had made it to do so.
When the rioters took to the streets, when the fires in Bristol lit the night sky, when Attwood's meeting at Birmingham resolved to pay no taxes, when, in short, revolution threatened, it was not because the Whig Government wanted reform as proposed in their Bill.
It was because the Tory Opposition would not allow it — and that in spite of a general election which, fought on the one issue, had just returned a House of Commons with a large majority in favour.
In sum, in the contention which attended or, as some might prefer, the dialectical process which generated the structural change represented by the measures contained in the Reform Bill, the Whigs by proposing and  the Tories by opposing them finally identified it as the exclusive issue on which people would stand up and be counted, for or against, yes or no.
So, it was in the ordinary conduct of party politics by men in pursuit of power that expectations, aspirations and objectives were reduced to an apparent simplicity, to a crudity of choice for which all that could be said was that it represented the national will.
And that, for most people and for the time being, said everything.
After all, the Whigs were still acting within the framework of assumptions commonly held by the ruling class then and tacitly accepted by the great majority of a generally deferential lower class, assumptions which attached privilege — and responsibility — to property.
Given that framework, the glaring injustice to which the Whigs pointed was that the distribution of seats in Parliament should secure the ‘representation of green mounds, of stone wall, even of a pig sty, while many of our most populous manufacturing towns remain unrepresented’; that one propertied class should be overwhelmingly represented while another had so little say in Parliament.
The challenge to the settled order of society originated almost wholly in the political aspirations, suppressed in response to the French Revolution and continuing for nearly forty years, of the latter part of the eighteenth century.
We can see that it coincided with the beginning of that period when society in Britain was to adjust to the absolutely new conditions of the Industrial Revolution, to develop the political thought that signalled the recognition of the need to adjust, and of the institutions to realise the adjustment.
We may not go on to assume that informed opinion then had already recognised the nature of the prospective problem, nor to attribute to the reforming Whigs a reactionary motive which depends on that assumption.
They were catching up with an interrupted past, not forestalling a proletarian future.
They looked back to Charles James Fox, not forward to Karl Marx.
None of this is to ignore Thompson's evidence that some among the older Radicals saw that the Bill did nothing immediately to secure political democracy.
Rather, it is to agree with his conclusion that, while for the articulate elite, like the artisans who constituted the Owenite membership of the National Union of Working Classes and Others and who debated reform at the London Rotunda, the kind of reform they wanted — annual parliaments, universal suffrage and the ballot — was just what Grey expressly denied.
It is also to agree that they could not be said to  represent the mass of unskilled working people.
‘The unskilled’, he observed, ‘had no spokesmen and no organisations (apart from friendly societies).
They were as likely to have followed the lead of a gentleman as of an artisan.’
And for gentlemen, for men of property, the idea that the unpropertied working class should be represented in Parliament simply could not arise, any more than the reformers, with few exceptions, could enter into the minds of working people or sympathise with the political aspirations of their leaders.
Where the reformers did start to understand, they perceived that those aspirations were to something much more even than that complete political democracy which required no property qualification; and they did not like the perception.
As Bertrand Russell points out, it was James Mill, active Radical as he was, who in 1831 wrote of Hodgskin's followers: ‘Their notions of property look ugly:…they seem to think that it should not exist, and that the existence of it is an evil to them.
Rascals, I have no doubt, are at work among them….
The fools, not to see that what they madly desire would be such a calamity to them as no hands but their own could bring upon them.’
In a later letter, Mill went on to blame Hodgskin for what he calls ‘mad nonsense’.
These comments, Russell concludes, marked the beginning of the conflict between Capitalism and Socialism.
But for the great mass of the people, for the emergent working class, that lay in the future.
It is impossible to read an account of the tumultuous years from 1829, when Owen returned from America, to 1832 without a sense of the high excitement, the passionate involvement which the mass of ordinary people felt as the drama unfolded.
Here, following the banner of reform, led by the gentlemen of that most aristocratic Whig Government, led by Lord Grey, Lord Melbourne, Lord John Russell, they saw for a time before them the high road to a better and fairer ordering of society.
The Webbs' account of the transformation of the Metropolitan Trade Union is instructive: Here we can see how the general impulse to a fairer social order, one which would displace Owen's ‘old immoral world’, became concentrated upon parliamentary reform.
And by William Lovett, remember: one of that articulate elite which attended the debates at the Rotunda; one who, knowing full well how partial, minimal and divisive the Whigs' proposals were, was compelled by the polarisation of opinion they induced to a course of action contributing much to the great flood of support for them; one who was a founder of the Chartist Movement formed in the wake of the Reform Act.
For disappointing though the Act was to prove to the great and unpropertied majority whose aspirations had been absorbed into the emotional dynamic needed to sustain the political will to secure its passage through Parliament, nevertheless it had shown that the Constitution could be changed constitutionally.
Thus, Chartism was the eldest surviving child of Owenism; and the six points of the People's Charter brought into sharper focus, and as a realisable political objective within the given constitutional framework, the expectations of most of those who had earlier looked, if not for the re-creation of man on Owen's visionary model, at least for a rapid and general application of co-operative practice as the means to a better life: who had, in short, looked for the reconstruction of the state as an industrial democracy.
Owen's own first chosen vehicle, the co-operative community, had become an irrelevance and was seen to be impracticable.
William Lovett was indeed right to lose faith in ‘a community of property’.
Nor should we overlook the emotional fatigue that would have followed the achievement of the 1832 Reform.
By institutionalising conflict, party politics provides the means by which the accumulated potential of passionate conviction may be so far discharged as to avoid its most damaging manifestations: where the resources available to the forces for and against change are evenly balanced, civil war; where they are greater for those against change, repression; and where they are  greater for those for change, revolution.
But, the discharge having occurred, it takes time for such another potential to accumulate.
Cole observes that the rate of growth in the number of co-operative societies was fastest in 1829 and 1830, when the struggle for Reform was beginning, and declined thereafter; but dismisses as unsupported by evidence the view that Reform drew popular support away from Co-operation.
This surely puts the burden of proof the wrong way round: those most actively engaged in promoting Co-operation or, more precisely, Owenism, were involved in the fight for Reform.
The need would be to show, against reasonable expectation, that the second did not divert attention from the first.
And the fact remains that the People's Charter not Co-operation, not Owenism, became after 1832 the great cause.
After 1832, after Reform, in Britain revolution was done for.
Yet not in Owen's view, not the change that was to establish an industrial democracy, not the revolution that this least violent, this most sweetly reasonable of men now sought to bring about.
Long since, in 1817, he had argued for moderation, for careful preparation.
‘The circumstances of our times’, he had then said in his Report to the Committee of the House of Commons on the Poor Laws , ‘render a change in our internal policy respecting the poor and the working classes absolutely necessary; and the first question to be decided by every man of all ranks is: shall the alteration be made under the guidance of moderation and wisdom, foreseeing and gradually preparing each step, one regularly after another, thereby preventing a single premature advance — or, shall the change be effected by ignorance and prejudice, under the baneful influence of [anger and violence]….
But, surely, the experience of past ages, and particularly of the last twenty-five years, will have taught men wisdom, and prepared the minds of all for a calm and dispassionate enquiry.’
And again, in the same year, in a letter printed in the London newspapers, he warned: Not the language, not the style to call the people to the barricades, then, but quite the reverse — the language of reform, illuminated by the sweet smile of reason.
Even when, sixteen years later in 1833, he saw in trade unionism the instrument through which to establish industrial democracy, the change was to be painless, to steal upon the country unaware, ‘like a thief in the night’.
For it was as we have seen, in September 1833, that the delegate conference of the Builders' Union decided at Owen's prompting to constitute the union as an organisation to run the building industry.
The prompting was persuasively simplistic; and, but for the fact that Owen believed every word of it, would have been unforgivably irresponsible.
Labour was, he told the conference, the source of all wealth; and by means of a universal compact among themselves those who produced it would keep it.
At once, the Builders' Union was faced by a lock-out.
Among the masters the move to destroy unions spread; and support for the Grand National Consolidated Trade Union, not yet fully organised and unable to sustain its members through the ensuing series of strikes and lock-outs, rapidly faded away.
In 1834 the Tolpuddle Martyrs were transported to Australia, ostensibly for administering a secret oath but in fact for forming a trade union.
The Factory Act of 1833 had not established the ten-hour day.
Thus, so soon after the passage of the Reform Act was it shown to have done nothing to realise the aspirations of working men.
Thus, as soon, was Owen's attempt to create a nationwide union of workers to collapse; and with it, his complex of interdependent aims: the assumption by the union of the ownership and control of industry; the adoption by the union of the co-operative form of organisation as the instrument of ownership and control; and hence the establishment, even before political democracy, of a comprehensive and integral system of industrial democracy.
Thus, so soon after the pronouncement of the intention to restructure industry, through trade unionism, as national co-operatives and so in effect to deny labour to conventionally organised industry, reality compelled the unions to start fashioning themselves as a response to capital rather than as an alternative to it.
A trade union was now to become, in the  Webbs' first definition ‘a continuous association of wage earners for the purpose of maintaining or improving the conditions of their employment’, a definition later altered so as to refer to ‘working lives’ rather than‘employment’.
The reason for the change points again to the essential dilemma trade unionism faced.
The Webbs explain that their original definition, relating the trade unions' function to conditions of employment, implied that trade unions had always contemplated a perpetual continuance of the capitalist or wage system, whereas they had at various dates during the past century at any rate frequently had aspirations towards a revolutionary change in social and economic conditions.
Yes, of course: but the change of definition and the explanation advanced in support of the change serve rather to emphasise the reality that, after 1834, emergent trade unionism moved towards a juncture with the system it could not supplant.
That movement might be said to have become irreversible with the advent after 1850 of the ‘new model’ unions.
Usually cited as the first of its kind, the Amalgamated Society of Engineers comprised into a national organisation over one hundred unions or branches of union, the whole administered by a central executive.
The Union ‘eschewed the secret society methods of many earlier unions, welcomed publicity, and persistently reminded the public that it was a peaceful concern, with no desire for Utopia or class war.’
The Union had become part of the capitalist system.
Even more precisely to the point was the preliminary report to the conference, at Easter 1845, of trade union delegates from all parts of the country.
One of the principal objects of the conference was, it declared, ‘to cultivate a good understanding with the employers and thereby remove those prejudices which exist against trade combinations, by showing that they only seek by combination to place themselves upon equal terms as disposers of their labour with those who purchase it; to secure themselves from injury, but by no
Yet, none of this is to say that the men who created the new unionism were wrong in their time.
It is to say that there was available neither the will nor the means to drive through the revolution which would have established Owen's new order.
For it was in the end a revolution only in thought, not in action.
It could not steal upon the country unaware, like a thief in the night.
It would have come, if it was to come at all, only if a well co-ordinated, centrally directed campaign of strikes, carried out by an immensely disciplined and united workforce, and backed by enough money to support the strikers for as long as necessary, could have been made to prevail against the resolute and more readily co-ordinated opposition of masters who stood to lose everything if the strikers won.
There was no possible reason why the masters should acquiesce in the expropriation of the means of production they owned.
Why in that case should they wish to help secure the continuance of production?
As far as they were concerned, it might as well stop.
The revolution would have come, if it was to come at all, only if the demand for industrial democracy through the agency of Industrial Co-operation, could have prompted such a comprehensive tide of sympathetic opinion as had carried parliamentary reform over the barriers of stubborn opposition.
But it certainly could not be said of the master-manufacturers that theirs was the whisper of a faction, nor of the unions in their post-1832  revolutionary phase that theirs was the voice of the nation.
Quite to the contrary; and it could have been repeated — and no doubt was — that their notions of property looked ugly, very ugly indeed.
No: the revolution would have come, if it was to come at all, only if the resources available to the forces for change, the unions, had been enough to enable them to seize and hold the means of production, and if they had had the will to employ those resources; not as a thief in the night but in a scene of anarchy and dreadful confusion of which the French Revolution would have given but a faint anticipation.
Not a bit what Owen had in mind, but since the unions had neither the resources nor the will to use them, the revolution did not come at all.
The men who created the new unionism and, in so doing, abandoned Industrial Co-operation (except as a minor and incidental means to trade unionism's ends of improving conditions of employment) were not wrong in their time because, in short, history was not yet ready for Industrial Co-operation.
It was ready for the further development of Capitalism as the means of assuring the exponential increase in production which the Industrial Revolution was making possible, the phenomenal expansion which for the next forty years was to be centred on a Britain uniquely the workshop of the world and the engine of economic growth.
Certainly, that expansion could never have occurred in a society organised into villages of co-operation; nor would industries run by trade unions as workers’ co-operatives and organised nationally have provided a basis for it, for the accumulation of capital with which to finance the crucial, secondary stage of the Industrial Revolution: that is, the establishment of a capital goods sector of the economy.
For where the first stage, the mechanised production in factories of consumer goods for an existing colonial market virtually monopolised by Britain, promised and provided immediate and enormous profit on a relatively modest outlay, the second did not.
Capital was needed on an unprecedented scale to satisfy the opportunities for investment in the coal mines and, more importantly, in the means of transporting coal.
In financing the development at home and abroad of the railways, it made possible the enormous growth in the production first of iron, later of steel, which characterised the secondary stage of the Industrial Revolution and guaranteed it as an irreversible change.
Robert Owen is not to be understood at all except as a man of his time, of the French Political and the British Industrial Revolutions; nor fully to be understood except as a man of the first stage of the Industrial Revolution.
The man who, in 1789, borrowed £100 to start in business as a master-manufacturer was 64 years old when in 1825 the Stockton to Darlington line ushered in the age of the railway.
One can see that, fanciful though the idea of the co-operative community is bound to look in the light of the later development of the Industrial Revolution, in 1814 when he wrote A New View of Society that idea would have seemed quite credible.
It was, after all, founded in his own successful participation in the first stage of the Revolution — but the first stage only.
What the second stage needed was not a distribution, such as a successful general adoption of the co-operative form of organisation would have prompted, of the wealth created by the first stage, but rather an accumulation and concentration.
So, while in 1814 the prime criticism of the idea was that it expected too much of human nature, too much of the people who were to live in the communities and of those who were to put them there, while then it was in short a social criticism, by 1832 the idea had become an economic nonsense.
It was no way to build railways.
Profitability or, as some may prefer, greed was the dynamic — plus, to be fair, a romantic enthusiasm for railways as the most vivid expression of man's capacity to master his environment.
‘Let the great world spin for ever down the ringing grooves of change,’ wrote Tennyson, somewhat later, catching the romance and enthusiasm exactly but getting the detail of his metaphor badly wrong.
Better still, for a sense of the triumphant achievement of the Industrial Revolution in its second stage, look again at Turner's Rain, Steam and Speed .
The triumph and the achievement were Capitalism's.
It is difficult to see how at that point in history it could have been otherwise.
Thus it was that the country which, reflecting the convictions of an invincible alliance of the middle and working classes, chose parliamentary reform, limited and partial but irreversibly directed towards full political democracy, and avoided revolution.
Thus it rejected Owen's bid, revolutionary in concept but illusory in fact, to appropriate all industry into a nationwide industrial democracy: and, by that rejection, but quite unaware that it had done so, left unimpeded the second stage of the Industrial Revolution, the stage that guaranteed that it too would be irreversible, that the continuance of a phenomenal increase in the production of wealth could occur.
In the result, Co-operation seen as an exclusive alternative to Capitalism as the means of organising society for the  production of wealth was, for all practical purposes, abandoned; and abandoned with it was trade unionism seen as the means by which capitalism was to be displaced by Co-operation.
Their functional link severed, Co-operation and trade unionism went on separately to join the system they could not defeat.
The price they paid for admission was the sacrifice of industrial democracy: Co-operation by largely foregoing the promotion of Industrial Co-operation, trade unionism by making the maintenance or improvement of their members' working conditions the prime object.
The rights of working men at work remained the rights inhering in the property they owned: their labour, and nothing more.
They would sell it at the best price they could get for it.
Labour, which in Owen's prospectus, was to become a dominant estate in a reconstituted body politic, remains a commodity.
For those who see in this the loss of an opportunity to remould the world more nearly to their hearts' desire, that must be the overwhelming pity.
Others who take the view that the outcome was inevitable, and with it the continuing conflict between capital and labour, will find comfort in the fact that the conflict was, after a time, institutionalised.
Where the lower orders of life have to make do with conditioned reflexes which so operate on behaviour as to limit conflict to levels that do not threaten the species, man — blessed as he is with free will — must institutionalise or die.
Co-operation and trade unionism chose to become acceptable and respectable, to become part of the institutional framework.
PRODUCERS AND CONSUMERS
Identified by Hobsbawm as The Age of Capital , in the history of Co-operation in the United Kingdom the period 1848 to 1875 is marked by the emergence of the Consumers' Movement as a major feature of retail trade, the exposure of the antithesis between it and Producers' Co-operation and, as a result, the virtual abandonment of the latter as an expression of democracy.
Not that the Pioneers of the Consumers' Movement supposed that they were abandoning Owenite objectives, still less that they intended to do so.
For the men of Rochdale, desirable though the store at Toad Lane was for its immediate practical purpose, their principal objective remained the setting up of a Co-operative Community.
As Cole points out, the Pioneers ‘were setting out to be at one and the same time a Producers’ and a Consumers' Society; and this seemed natural to them because all their endeavours were meant to lead to the creation of a Co-operative Community on the Owenite model, in which the distinction between producers and consumers would not exist.’
First on the list of their declared objectives was ‘The establishment of a store for the sale of provisions, clothing etc.’; and third ‘To commence the manufacture of such articles as the Society may determine upon, for the employment of such members as may be without employment, or who may be suffering in consequence of repeated reductions in their wages.’
Cole adds that what actually happened when the Pioneers engaged in production was not what they had intended when they started their co-operative; and goes on to offer a more detailed explanation: The Rochdale Manufacturing Society was set up in 1854, Supposing that, as an expression of democracy, Co-operative principles are as valid for the producer working in the factory producing goods for sale in the Co-operative store as they are for the consumer buying them there, a newcomer to the story might find it surprising that the Pioneers' belief is presented, if not itself as a matter for surprise, then certainly one for explanation.
Cole continues: That explanation is significant as much for its excusatory tone as for its substance; and the excuse is of the Pioneers, decision to establish a production arm as a separate entity from the consumer society, a decision pointing production for consumer co-operatives along a road to the industrial co-operative form of organisation, along a road it was not to take.
The Pioneers did not ‘attempt to carry it on as part of their own activities under the control of the general body of members’.
By contrast, production by what became in time the Co-operative Wholesale Society is, in principle at least, under the control of the general body of members of the consumers' societies.
So, the Pioneers must have been wrong: and to pronounce that judgment upon heroic founding fathers must have been difficult.
Still, they were to be forgiven because the course they adopted, of ‘setting out to be at one and the same time a Producers’ and a Consumers' Society' seemed natural to them.
It is here that the explanation falters.
It is one thing to recognise that the interests of producers and consumers are likely to be opposed: for the first will wish to sell at the highest, the second to buy at the lowest price.
But the assumption, doubtful in itself, that in a Co-operative Community the distinction would have had no meaning does not explain why, when in the real world of Rochdale in the 1850s the distinction became apparent to them the Pioneers chose to set up the production arm as a separate society.
Yet it was accordingly — to quote Cole again — that the producers' co-operative was set up as an industrial, or perhaps more exactly, as a proto-industrial co-operative.
As revealing is his observation that the rights of the workers in the separate producers' societies were regarded as giving them their distinctive Co-operative character.
Again, are we to infer that the appearances were deceptive and that the Societies were not co-operatives?
Plainly, in the minds of the Pioneers they were; yet Cole uses language from which we may infer that they were not.
In summary, his presentation allows readers to suppose that the Pioneers were wrong in establishing, or attempting to establish, the producers' societies as bodies separate from the consumers' societies, and wrong even in seeing them as genuine co-operatives.
And in 1944 when Cole wrote his book as part of the Movement's centenary tribute to the Rochdale Pioneers, when Consumers' Co-operation could still look back on many decades of unbroken success, it would have been as natural for him to suppose that the Pioneers had in this respect been mistaken and that their  mistake stood in need of explanation.
Production for wholesale supply to co-operative retail stores was for virtually all practical purposes incidental to the Consumers' Co-operation and had little separate existence.
Workers in the Movement's factories were its paid employees.
In no sense could they be said to be members of industrial co-operatives: that is, of organisations set up for the manufacture of goods or the provision of services and wholly, or very largely, owned and ultimately controlled by those working in them.
As labour employed by capital, in principle they needed trade unions and were organised by them, exemplary employer though the Consumers' Movement generally was.
So, in their capacity as workers in those factories they were not Co-operators at all, though they may very well have been members of consumers, co-operative societies owning an interest in those factories.
Yet, because nothing succeeds like success, Cole too may be excused; for making the tacit assumption that the Pioneers were mistaken, excused because Consumer Co-operation had abandoned their model, was successful, and had all the authority of success.
In 1944, Co-operation was the Consumers' Movement, confident in its achievement; and its self-imposed limitation upon its perception of its purposes was justified by success.
Perhaps more significant are the events in the remaining and short history of the Rochdale Co-operative Manufacturing Society.
Cole records that, in the straitened circumstances attending the trade depression of 1857–8, the payment of dividend on invested capital was made a prior charge on profits, payable, that is, before the workers' bonus; and the remaining profits were to be divided at a uniform rate on wages paid and on invested capital.
‘The position was’, he observes, ‘thus reversed, the investors taking both a prior claim and a higher rate in the pound than was allowed the workers.’
The main body of the investors was, of course, the Pioneers' Society; and it was primarily in intention and practice a consumers' co-operative.
Dissatisfaction continued, Cole adds.
As it was then understood: here again, Cole's problem is to reconcile a course seen by the Pioneers themselves as treasonable, with the fact that it foreshadowed the policy to be followed by successful Consumers' Co-operation, that policy which for its purposes made co-operative production incidental and subordinate to it and which most certainly did nothing to promote the development of an industrial co-operative sector properly so-called.
What at the outset in 1854 had been perceived as a bonus, an extra but due as of right to the workers, had by 1862 become ‘the bounty to labour’, a gift bestowed and so gratuitous.
Capital, co-operative but capital nevertheless, employed labour; and capital would whenever expedient exert the employer's authority.
The truth is that, as the Co-operative Manufacturing Society was constituted, it was not — for all the Pioneers' intentions to the contrary — a genuine co-operative.
For since, just as in any conventionally organised manufacturing enterprise, capital employed labour, its first priority naturally and necessarily was to secure a sufficient return for the investors on their investment.
There is, therefore, no difficulty in accepting the inference Cole presents.
But only so far as this: that the Pioneers did not in fact succeed in creating the Manufacturing Society as a Co-operative.
For that is not necessarily to say that the Consumers' Movement's treatment of production as incidental to its interests was, on a strategic view of the objectives of Co-operation, right.
To follow Cole that far would come perilously near to accepting that Co-operation was, as nearly as makes no difference, the Consumers' Movement; and that its future lay in further growth beyond that already achieved by 1939 until, so long as progress continued, it could within its chosen field have virtually displaced all competing provision and all competing manufacture for the purpose of provision.
That indeed, though subject to some caveats, is the prospect Cole seems to have seen.
However, we need to reserve, against his conclusion, this other possibility at least: that the Pioneers' intention to establish the Manufacturing Society as a separate entity was strategically right, but structurally  mishandled; while the Consumer Movement's perception of the place of production in the Co-operative scheme was a strategic mistake, most successfully carried out.
And nothing succeeds like success.
Yet, for two main reasons, the demise of the Rochdale Co-operative Manufacturing Society did not finally close the question of how in principle co-operative production should be organised.
The first reason was external, the second internal to the Movement.
The first derived from the interest of the Christian Socialists in the institution of Working Men's Associations for Co-operative Production.
Charles Kingsley and his associates saw the question, Cole records, as a moral issue; and valued Consumers, Co-operation only because it helped to provide retail outlets for producers' co-operatives.
The high moral principle, to use his own phrase, of mid-Victorian muscular Christianity, may well have seemed to the agnosticism of early twentieth-century scientific certainty an insubstantial basis for the development of Co-operation; and, as a derivative from the French, from the advocacy by Louis Blanc and Buchez of self-governing Producers' Associations formed by workmen and operating through ‘National Workshops’, the concept was not only at odds with but alien to that of the British Movement which had come to be dominated by the Consumer Movement.
Anyway, the Christian Socialists' Association for Co-operative Production failed; and nothing fails like failure.
Moral principle is of course no guarantee of practicality.
But again, that is not to say that the Christian Socialists had necessarily got their priorities wrong, nor that the French emphasis was wholly misplaced.
The internal debate was revived as a controversy which ‘rent the Co-operative Movement for many years’: should there be paid a bonus to labour?
The occasion for the controversy was the foundation of a central agency to produce goods for sale by Co-operative stores; and it was to the workers in the agency's factories that the question related.
Set up in 1851, the first of these precursors of the CWS was the London-based Central Co-operative Agency.
The CCA's constitution provided that one-half of the profits remaining after the payment of interest on subscribed capital should be paid to the Agency's workers as a bonus.
No provision was made for the payment to Co-operative retail stores of dividends on their purchases from the Agency.
By contrast, the Co-operative Wholesale Agency, proposed in a report  to a Co-operative Conference held in June 1851 in Manchester, was to pay one half of the net profits not as a bonus to its employees but as dividends to co-operative retail stores on their purchases from the Agency.
Thus, the intention was that the CCA should give the workers in the factories, the producers, a right as against the members of the local co-operative stores, the consumers; while the CWA should give the members of the stores a right as against workers in the factories.
Here in that contrast, the antithesis between the interests of Consumers' and Producers' Co-operation is sharply presented.
And when in 1863 the Co-operative Wholesale Society was set up, it was on the basis that participating stores should contribute capital and share in the profits.
Even now, the controversy was not resolved.
To quote from Cole again: They had a short-lived success.
In 1872, the CWS agreed to do so; but in 1875 the employees' right to a bonus was abrogated when delegates to a quarterly meeting of consumers' societies ‘swept away the entire bonus system after less than three years’ trial, and at the same time abolished the United Employees' Association and the privileges' — that is, on the purchases of goods —‘attached to it, decreeing that employees should share and share alike with other members both as purchasers and as recipients of dividends on their purchases.’
There were what Cole calls difficulties, but which might better be identified as disadvantages, for the retail co-operatives in so constituting the production arm as to admit the bonus to labour.
For the retail co-operatives, it posed the question whether their employees too were to be paid a bonus, thus reducing the amount available for distribution on purchases, or whether they should be paid the rate for the job.
Certainly: yet behind that most immediate question remained the profounder one.
Was co-operative store keeping to be regarded ‘not as an end in itself but as a step towards the Co-operative or Socialist Commonwealth…envisaged partly in terms of producers’ self-government'?
That contrast needs to be focused more sharply.
Was Consumers' Co-operation, first conceived of as a means to realise co-operative aspirations of a  much more comprehensive kind, to establish the same relations with its employees as would any other employer?
Was it, in other words, to adopt a tactic which, however successful in securing the advance of a particular sector at a particular period, would tend to work against that realisation?
If a major feature of the Co-operative Commonwealth was to be the ownership and control by the workforce of the particular enterprise employing them, if, in other words, it was to comprehend authentic industrial democracy, then the abrogation in 1875 of the workers' rights and privileges of the workers employed in factories producing goods for sale in co-operative retail stores was a misdirection of the Movement.
Only of course, if the other direction, the road to industrial democracy through the promotion of an industrial co-operative sector, was in reality then open to the Movement.
There is a persuasive argument that it was not.
That argument is that the dividend was necessary to the successful establishment, from nothing, of the co-operative store.
For the great majority of its members this, and not the long-term and grander aspirations of the Movement, was the compelling attraction; and the institution of the dividend on purchases created among members a dominant body of people whose interest was to maximise the amount.
This is not to criticise them.
For housewives trying to do their best for their families, for whom every mid-Victorian penny counted, of course the dividend was what mattered.
Yet once that dominant interest existed, the option of directing available money away from consumers to producers was no longer real if the system were to grow sufficiently in good times, survive in bad.
One cannot argue of Co-operation then both that it was the dividend that did it, and did for it.
Those proponents of Producers' Co-operation who ‘wanted each factory to be established as a separate profit-sharing society’ were right in principle: for only thus could it escape from the dominant consumer interest, only thus secure the ground from which to mount its own advance towards the more important objective of Co-operative aspiration.
Right in principle, but almost certainly wrong in their appraisal of the practical possibilities.
And the Pioneers were right to see in the dispossession by the consumer interest of the rights of the workers in the Manufacturing Society as a fundamental change of Co-operative purpose and as implying the acceptance of a much more limited expectation for it, but wrong not to recognise that that change, that limitation inhered in the idea of a dividend itself: for that, more than anything else, activated the potential conflict of interest created by the differing functions — that of workers making things for sale and that of consumers buying them to use.
So, to the conclusion that the Pioneers' attempt to establish Producers' Co-operation was structurally mishandled, we may now add something more.
We may agree with Cole's conclusion that the resolution of the debate in favour of Consumers' control was right at the time, but on ground of practical necessity.
We can agree with him therefore that the Pioneers were wrong in their view that the abolition of workers' rights, expressed as a bonus to labour, was a misdirection of the Movement — but wrong only because there was then no other direction for it to take.
But we do not have to follow him further, to the view that authentic Producers' Co-operation is to be found in factories owned and ultimately controlled not by the men and women working in them, but by the members of the Consumers' Co-operatives whose capital built and equipped the factories, and employed labour to work in them.
The Pioneers need no apologia for insisting that the means were being turned into an end in itself; and that, in the process the Movement was losing sight of, if not abandoning, its great cause.
One would have wished for some recognition of the fact that a view of Co-operation which limits it almost wholly to the Consumers' Movement and is satisfied with that limitation, is at least to be regretted.
That limited view had authoritative support.
The idea of social security as a proper charge on the State, and of the use in consequence of taxation as a means of distributing wealth more widely, lay well beyond the British political horizon.
For Gladstone it was entirely consistent with his ambition to abolish income tax, which he declared to be immoral, that Consumers' Co-operation should be endorsed as an instrument to encourage the working classes to frugality.
In a broader context, it can, as ideological preference may urge, be regarded either as part of the exercise in the 1860s of that liberal political wisdom which freely conceded timely advances to the advocates of change and so harnessed their energies and aspirations to the support of the general interest in the maintenance of stability and the creation of wealth in a prospering nation; or as part of the calculated manipulation of events so as to ensure the preservation of the existing social structure against fundamental changes such as the institution of a juster order would require.
Those who prefer the second view are, however, in this difficulty: that it was the Movement itself that  took the decision to reduce its ambitions to the more narrowly ameliorative and unobjectionable.
Though Christian Socialism ‘with the old Owenites and idealistic Socialists…regarded Co-operative Store keeping not as an end in itself but as a step towards the Co-operative or Socialist Commonwealth…envisaged partly in terms of producers’ self-government', the victory had gone to those who stood ‘against them, the main body of the working-class adherents for whom the Store Movement was a reality and Co-operation mainly an agency for mutual thrift and the procuring of unadulterated goods at fair prices.’
It was entirely consistent with liberal social and economic philosophy.
So, too, was — and remains — the title of the legislation empowering the Registrar of Friendly Societies to register a co-operative as a corporate entity.
To this day it is the Industrial and Provident Societies Act; and none in 1852 would have denied the need to encourage the working classes to provide for themselves.
The irony is that the Act came before Parliament at the instance of the Christian Socialists, whose concern was to promote the industrial co-operative form of organisation; and the further irony that the legislation was put through Parliament under the Tory administration formed by Lord Derby in that year.
Lord Russell's Liberal administration had refused facilities.
Cole explains the refusal as a consequence of the strike in that year by the Amalgamated Society of Engineers.
The union had sought to frustrate the lock-out by the masters of its members by engaging itself in co-operative production.
So it may be said that the legislation was promoted by a pressure group whose perception of Co-operation was decried by the Consumers' Movement; and passed under a Tory rather that a Liberal Government because a trade union tried to make a tactical use of just that form of co-operative preferred by the promoters and decried by the Consumers' Movement.
Nevertheless, except in one regard, the Industrial and Provident Societies Act of 1852 provided the basis on which co-operative societies of whatever kind could establish themselves as corporate entities.
In doing so, it secured for co-operatives what the first of the modern Companies Acts had done in 1844 for joint stock companies.
To neither form of business undertaking had the privilege of limited liability yet been conceded.
For this, companies had to wait until 1855; and co-operatives until 1862.
Thus rapidly, and with support on all sides, did Co-operation become accepted as a means of doing business, and at much the  same time as did the joint stock company in essentially its modern form.
It is tempting to see the role of the Tory administration, which included Disraeli, as an anticipatory theft of the other Party's clothes.
But the Conservative conversion, at Disraeli's prompting, to the cause of reform, had to wait another fifteen years.
The better view is that classical liberal economic thought, which propounded that the market allocated resources satisfactorily, that unimpeded private enterprise guaranteed growth and progress, and that intervention by governments was unnecessary and undesirable, had already become common ground.
As a form of enterprise entirely consistent with that thinking and with the given social order, Co-operation could command the support of John Stuart Mill just as much as it responded to the exhortation of Samuel Smiles.
So, manifested as the co-operative store, Co-operation was bound to be acceptable.
Gladstone, Cobden and Bright were for it.
And so too were the Earl of Shaftesbury and Sotherton Escourt, Tory Home Secretary in 1859.
What had in the early 1830s been, in Robert Owen's perception, an instrument of revolution, for the reconstitution of society as an industrial democracy, had now become an expression of Victorian values.
As we saw earlier, the period which marks the emergence of Consumers' Co-operation as virtually the sole objective of the Movement, and its rejection of authentic Producers' Co-operation, coincides with Hobsbawm's Age of Capital , that period which marked the phenomenal growth of a global economy of industrial capitalism and so held out the prospect of unlimited and unfailing progress — and nowhere more than in Britain which held a de facto international monopoly in trade in manufactures.
If, for that reason, ‘the (British) industrial revolution had swallowed the (French) political revolution’, then as part of the process, successful Capitalism digested Co-operation as the Owenites had envisaged it.
The coincidence was not mere chance.
The quarter-century of sustained growth, broken only by minor interruptions, provided a favourable climate for the growth of self-help Consumers' Co-operation operating in a buoyant and free domestic market: Producers' Co-operation, the self-governing workshop, remained a means of protest against the generally accepted order, an out-of-fashion remnant from the hungry forties.
By contrast, trade unionism through which Owen had intended to organise the Country as an industrial democracy stayed out in  the legal cold.
Cole says, first and simply, that after 1850, ‘Co-operation became respectable but that trade unionism remained much longer an outlaw.
So the two movements drifted further and further apart.’
Too simple a judgment perhaps: it might better be said that, manifested as the Consumers' Movement, Co-operation had become an alternative presentation of the rights of ownership against the rights of labour, while trade unionism existed to assert the rights of labour against those of ownership.
Insist though trade unions might that their purpose was not to subvert the market economy but to sell labour at a fair price as a commodity in it, the fact remained that successful trade unionism implied reduced dividends on investment, just as organising the production of goods for sale in Co-operative stores as a function of independent industrial co-operatives implied reduced dividends on purchases from them.
The movements did not so much drift apart as come to represent opposed interests.
Later, Cole comes near to conceding the point: ‘in the eighties, Trade Unionism and Consumer Co-operation went on their several ways, each shedding much of its earlier idealism and each settling down to consolidate its position within somewhat narrowly delineated fields’, which will do as an anodyne description but which, in suppressing the pain, obscures the diagnosis.
And again: Even this concession is too kind a description of the divorce.
It misses the significance of the points: first, that the occasional engagement of trade unionism in the promotion of industrial co-operatives had been tactical and opportunistic, rather than principled; and second, that Co-operation identified as the Consumers' Movement had opposed any significant role for the industrial co-operative, properly so-called.
The significance is that, together, the two operated to remove an essential feature from the full description of Co-operation; and in so doing to deny to the movement that function which it was uniquely able to discharge and which was, therefore, most likely to guarantee its growth and survival in perpetuity.
That function was not the provision of wholesome food at fair prices.
It was, and remains, authentic industrial democracy.
Yet, though in the early years almost certainly there was no alternative, there is still the question whether Consumers' Co-operation, once firmly established, could have reverted to the Pioneers' intention to establish independently controlled producers', or industrial, co-operatives.
And the question was raised, though with little success.
In 1874 J. T. W. Mitchell became Chairman of the CWS, and ‘under his strong hand its activities were, Cole writes, ‘rapidly developed; and it was largely due to his personal influence that the ‘federal’ principle of consumers' control came to be the accepted principle of the main body of the Movement.’
He was not, one gathers, a man to brook opposition.
‘Often at loggerheads with Holyoake, Greening, Hughes and other advocates of the ‘'bonus to labour’ and the development of Co-operative Production by means of independent Societies under producers' control, he was able to impress his personal philosophy of Co-operation upon the Movement and to win for himself a position of recognised leadership.’
Some sense of the conflict and confrontation generated by the difference on fundamental principle, the antithesis between Consumers' and Industrial Co-operation, comes through Cole's flat account, some sense of Mitchell as a man who saw things narrowly but very clearly, was sure of his objective and of the means of its achievement: the development of the CWS into the very large, multifarious and highly successful undertaking it became.
In that development there was to be found during the twenty years of his chairmanship no place for industrial democracy such as the admission of self-governing producers' co-operatives would have admitted.
And by then, the mould was set.
The CWS, and later the Scottish CWS, had become big business.
One other attempt to revive the Pioneers' intention requires a mention, that of the Co-operative Productive Federation (CPF).
The Federation established industrial co-operatives with the intent that they should not be absorbed into or controlled by the Consumers' Movement.
Cole grants them a grudging accolade.
It  was, he says, only a small movement.
It did not match the growth of what he calls Producer Co-operation under Consumer control.
Those who find in that formulation a description of authentic Co-operation will be content with his verdict.
Those who wonder whether the hire of labour by capital can ever be a feature of authentic co-operation may not be, even though the employing capital is owned by the Consumers' Movement.
Both may find a certain irony in the fact that some of the CPF industrial co-operatives founded in the 1880s are still trading successfully, while many retail co-operatives have failed, and have in the process of rescue become assimilated into other societies, so losing their individual identities and the reality of the democratic practice they are meant to activate, From well over 1,000 retail societies in the 1930s, the number has dwindled to 100; and the possibility of reducing it to 25 has been discussed (see Chapter 1 above).
The democratic form remains; the function is failing.
So, this at least is indisputable: that however it may have seemed to Cole in 1944, justification by success has lost its validity: and the loss prompts the question whether the Movement should re-appraise its purposes so as to establish Co-operation on a broader and securer footing.
For the practical appeal of Consumers, Co-operation — wholesome food at what, through the payment of dividends on purchase, amounts to lower prices — can ultimately be matched or bettered by competing non-co-operative stores, and so puts the Movement's existence at risk.
There is now no exclusive ecological niche for Consumer Co-operation to occupy as a guarantee of its survival and growth nor any reason to declare its stores, those  amiable dinosaurs, deserving of special protection, endangered though the species is.
If it could still be shown that it remains an effective expression of democracy, that would indeed be a reason; for any diminution of democracy is deplorable.
But there is no use in preserving the form when the function has failed; and it is difficult to see the democratic form of the consumers, co-operative can have much meaning for the generality of members — nor, of course, any for non-members — who use the stores.
Enlightened self-interest is, for those of us who are not saints, the necessary condition of social behaviour.
Take away the self-interest, and the residual appeal is enough only for the wholly unselfish.
And that is why democracy is to be understood as a practice before it is conceived as a set of abstractions; why it is a system of checks and balances before it is a set of principles; why, as  has been said, it is worth just two cheers, and no more.
Only the kingdom of love is worth three.
By contrast, the appeal of the industrial co-operative remains unchallengeable, its ecological niche exclusive to it.
No other form of industrial organisation can, of its nature, do what the industrial co-operative form does.
None of them is, nor can be, structured as to require that those in charge of enterprises in which people invest their working lives and expectations should account primarily and principally to them for the uses they make of those lives.
None is, nor can be, so structured as to ensure that the individual is not treated as a thing, as a commodity for use in the process of production or provision.
So, where for the great mass of its members, the success of a consumer co-operative is now no more than a matter of marginal interest to them, for the members of an industrial co-operative it is quite otherwise.
For the latter, the self-interest lies in being fully and finally in charge of one's working life, in recovering it as part of a life of one's own.
The enlightenment derives from the need for  commercial success, from the necessary recognition by members that their business cannot succeed if they take more out of it than it can stand.
There is, in short, a  conjunction of ultimate authority with ultimate  responsibility .
Yet, something more than the previous success, and consequent authority, of the Consumers' Movement is needed to explain the apparently complacent appraisal of the Co-operative scene as Cole portrays it, the unregretting acceptance of the failure of Co-operative principle implicit in the virtual abandonment of the promotion of authentic Producer Co-operation, the strategic mistake of continuing, after Consumers' Co-operation had so firmly established itself, to commit its resources solely to its own further development, and the failure to realise that where its attractions were not exclusively its own, industrial democracy attached uniquely to Producer Co-operation and so was an inalienable advantage.
If this seems too severe, there is no denying that the development of the industrial co-operative sector has had little reason over the years to feel grateful to the Consumer Movement.
On the contrary, its successes have been won in spite rather than because of that Movement.
Read Cole, speculating on the possibility of a revival, after the Second World War, of Producer Co-operation: That is an authoritative pronouncement of the view, prevailing for many decades, of the Consumer's Movement's attitude towards Producer Co-operation: the rival doctrine, not quite anathema, but something very like.
It may be supposed that Cole's comments refer only to the production of goods for retail in the Consumers, Movement's own stores, and are not to be read as relating to the more general development of the industrial co-operative sector.
No doubt the first was much in his mind.
But certainly not exclusively so.
And the general tenor of his appraisal of the history of the Movement after the Pioneers is that Producer Co-operation had been a vexatious distraction and would have little worthwhile future.
So dismissive a judgment requires further explanation.
Perhaps it is this.
Cole writes as a proponent of British Empirical Socialism: that is to say, of that view of Socialism which sees it as state, or municipal, ownership of industry and the planned economy, but as preserving political freedom and democracy in the western, liberal tradition.
But Capitalism was to go.
And developments which did not contribute to, nor necessarily seek that objective were for that reason defective.
Let Cole speak for himself: Nor, we might interpolate, should they: for the relationship between employer and employee is essentially the same in the two cases.
Unless the workers employed in a producers' co-operative are the final custodians of its affairs, the bonus — or better, the  bounty — remains a payment made as an act of grace; and the co-operative is not properly so-called.
Cole continues: Socialism is seen here as an alternative and exclusive economic system, among the identifying characteristics of which two must be present: consumers' control and the elimination of private profit.
On that severe view no Socialist could support the promotion of producers' or workers', or industrial co-operatives, call them what you will, if they are described as organisations for the manufacture of goods or for the provision of services, and wholly or very largely owned by and ultimately controlled by those working in them.
For, so described, they deny consumers' control and admit private profit.
They might be Capitalism with a human face.
It is that, the dissonance between the industrial co-operative form of organisation and the economic prospectus presented, when Cole was writing, by British Empirical Socialism, that completes the explanation of his dismissive judgment of Producer Co-operation.
Both of the main factors contributing to that judgment, the one the reality of the success of the Consumers' Movement and the certainties of the future growth and achievement, the other a perception of Socialism which cannot accommodate authentic Producer Co-operation, were fixed by the end of the nineteenth century.
And though, of the two, the first is no longer available to support the judgment, the second — whether the Socialism perceived is dogmatic or diffident, Marxist or empirical — is operative still to provide, for better or for worse, assumptions about the form of industrial democracy and about the roles, contrasted or opposed, to be played in it by an industrial co-operative sector and the trade unions.
For better or for worse?
We shall see.
DOGMA AND DIFFIDENCE
So, by the end of the nineteenth century, there was little in Co-operation, or in trade unionism, that Owen could have identified directly with his proposals to reconstitute the state as an industrial democracy and to create the productive classes, master-manufacturers and work-people, into a great estate of the realm.
And the lapse of interest in those proposals had been matched by the growth of a body of criticism.
Certainly, he does not lack for critics; and they are mainly to be found on the left of the political spectrum, amongst those who subscribe to Socialism in one or other of its varying forms.
Acclaiming him as one of the chief progenitors, the critics come not to bury but to praise him with faint damns.
Nor are the damns always so faint, though they are of course almost always uttered with that tendentious hindsight which devalues protest unless it proclaims class warfare and anticipates the emergence by the twentieth century of political parties created to prosecute it.
Also, their vehemence varies from one school of Socialism to another.
Thus, Marxists blame him for not anticipating Marx, war between classes as they define them; and the need, as they see it, for a frontal attack upon rights in property.
In their earlier period, those who preferred the inevitability of gradualness blamed him — as they did Marx — for the inadequacy of an economic theory which stopped at Ricardo; and for proposing an instant change to a national and co-operative structure for industry which would, they considered, in the event have failed to abolish competition and Capitalism, and would have  left the class structure of society unchanged except perhaps in detail.
The two, Marxist and Empirical Socialist, unite in their criticism of the utopian promise of his schemes and of the impracticability of his proposals for carrying them into effect.
The Marxist criticism is magisterially put by E.P.
Thompson.
‘There comes’, he says, ‘through his writings, not the least sense of the dialectical processes of social change, of ‘revolutionising practice’.’
He goes on to quote Marx's comment that the materialist doctrine that men are the product of circumstances and upbringing forgets that it is by men that circumstances are changed.
So, Owen's view that social character could be changed by education is a nonsense; for the kind of education needed could not occur unless circumstances changed first: no egg because there was no chicken, no chicken because there was no egg.
Some other agent of change was needed.
For Owen, whose materialist doctrine was rigorously environmental and mechanical, but not dialectical, that agent could only be millennial, a kind of secular second coming after which we should all in a moment, in a twinkling of an eye, be changed.
And thus is Owen's prospectus reduced to absurdity.
Thompson's purpose here is to contrast the eighteenth century's passive materialism, reflected in Owen's views, with the active, the dialectical materialism advocated by Marx; that is the materialism that would not be content only to interpret the world, but would alter it.
Thompson does not say here, in terms, that dialectical materialism has its answer, the class struggle carried to the extreme of revolution — unless we are to read ‘revolutionising practice’ as implying it, while sounding something less and, therefore, less disturbing.
That that implication is intended finds support in his summary of his objections to Owen's attitude.
There he pronounces Owenism's insistence on the right of property to be its vitiating weakness and contrasts it unfavourably with those who ‘could see that Socialism entailed the expropriation of the great land owners’; and goes on to conclude that because Owen refused to face the problem of ownership and power, he was able to remain quite indifferent to political Radicalism and to lead the movement astray.
Elsewhere, Thompson relates Marxist thinking to what he called industrial syndicalism and describes as one of the great themes of Owenism.
When Marx, he observes, was still in his teens, the battle between a capitalist and a socialist political economy for the minds of English trade unionists had been (at least temporarily) won.
One may read the observation as meant to imply  that the victory was something more than temporary.
It was not: for, as we have seen, organised labour very soon and consciously became the necessary reciprocal to employing capital and so constituted with it the developed system which had yet to be called Capitalism.
If the point of the reference to Marx is to show that emergent English trade unionism had anticipated his conclusion that workers must take control of the means of production, that, to re-iterate his contemporaneous quotation from A Member of the Building Union: ‘labour and capital will no longer be separate but they will be indissolubly joined together in the hands of the workmen and work-women’; and again, this time from Bronterre O'Brien to the effect that the object of combination was ‘to establish for the productive classes a complete domination over the fruits of their own industry….
An entire change in society — a change amounting to a complete subversion of the existing' ‘order of the world’— is contemplated by the working classes'; it is right to recall that the workers very soon abandoned the strategic option of displacing Capitalism.
Perhaps they were wiser in their generation.
But the more immediate comment is this: that whether the victory was at least temporary or only temporary, Thompson does not name Owen among the victors, as he does O'Brien; and where he reduces Owen's millenarian prospectus to absurdity, he is kinder to O'Brien.
‘It is easy’, he says, ‘in retrospect to see this spirit as naive or ‘utopian’ but there is nothing in it which entitles us to regard it with academic superiority.’
Of course not: nor, given the same fair-minded approach, is there in the spilt of Owen's prospectus — unless we consider that the millenarian aspiration which envisages ‘revolutionary practice’ is in some sense superior to one which does not.
Those who believe, or rather, know that the dialectic in its predetermined movement requires the appropriation, by wage-earners and as the outcome of their victory in the class war, of the means of production, and know that it is historically right to be on the side of that movement, will know also that the first is superior.
Those who suppose that a millennium is a millennium is a millennium will see that the distinction between Owen's and O'Brien's to be one without a practical difference; and put a question-mark against the doctrine on which it stands.
At the very least they will regard as over-severe that judgment of Owen which condemns his failure in his fifties to act upon Marxist doctrine before Marx, still in his teens, had formulated it.
And if, whether from an examination of the assumptions on which the  doctrine depends, or from an inspection of the results both when it is acted upon and when it is not, they conclude that it is mistaken anyway, they will also dismiss the Marxist criticism.
They will not necessarily suppose that Owen was right.
But, most certainly, they will not suppose that he was wrong because Marx knew better, because the future for society would inevitably be Marxist.
Nor, more importantly, will they be able to suppose that there could therefore be no lasting future for an industrial co-operative sector operating in a market economy, as an extension of democracy as the term is understood in the west and, hence, as an evolutionary advance from Capitalism.
We have, therefore, to consider the objections to the doctrine.
They are founded on three over-lapping grounds: usually, economic and philosophic; more rarely, biological.
Deployed often enough already, the objection to the economic element in Marx's thought needs no lengthy rehearsal.
It is enough to recall that Ricardo's labour theory of value, on which it depends, is generally held to be fallacious in its assertion that the price of goods or services is solely determined by the amount of socially necessary labour required to produce or provide them, and so ignores the cost of other inputs and the effect of demand.
Yet it is of course the labour theory of value which justifies the conclusion that the whole of the proceeds from the sale of goods or services should accrue to the workers: and hence, that income accruing from property — that is, from land and capital — to the owners is misappropriation; that the remedy is to abolish rights in property,; that, since property owners are bound to resist abolition, a class war between the workers or proletariat, and the property owners or bourgeoisie, is inevitable; and that it will be resolved by revolution.
The occasion of the revolution would be a culminatory economic crisis of a kind to which the bourgeois mode, or Capitalism, was inherently and incurably liable: that is, of over-production and under-consumption.
For then, the burden of misery imposed on the proletariat by the alienation of labour and the crisis would have become unbearable.
That the revolution must succeed does not, of course, follow from the economic argument alone, even if Marx has got it right.
The guarantee of success must be sought elsewhere.
For him, it resided in the philosophy of history he derived, although in an amended form, from Hegel, and which sees history as a dialectical process; that is, one of perpetual conflict between polarised opposites leading as by a law of nature from a less to a more perfect  condition — in short , a trial: thesis, antithesis and synthesis.
Where Hegel sees national or supra-national civilisations as the instrument or the perfecting dialectic, Marx sees classes of society; and where Hegel sees history as the account of the development of the abstract spirit of humanity — or, perhaps better, of the development of human consciousness — Marx relates his view to the mode of production which he sees as comprehending within itself all the factors affecting the formation and attributes of a society.
Where Hegel sees three stages, oriental, classical and germanic, in the progressive development of the spirit of humanity, Marx identifies four successive modes of production.
‘In broad outline’, he says, ‘we can designate the Asiatic, the ancient, the feudal and the modern bourgeois modes of production as progressive epochs in the economic formation of society.’
Within each mode, its attendant conditioning factors operate to stratify society into two, and only two, classes.
In the bourgeois mode, those classes are the workers and the property-owners, ‘two antinomies’ as Marx calls them.
That stratification would occur as a necessary consequence of the alienation of labour.
We shall need to return to the idea of alienation.
For the present, let us note that in Marx's view of history as a dialectical process, just as in a society whose mode of production was feudal, with its ‘contradictions’, a ruling class of landowners had been overthrown by an exploited peasantry, so too in a society whose mode was bourgeois would the capitalists be overthrown by the proletariat.
Let us note, too, that coming as Marx did to English economics after he had studied Hegel's philosophy of history, he could come with a mind predisposed to fit the first into a grand dialectical scheme such as the second propounded.
English economics provided him with the two antinomies he needed, proletariat and bourgeoisie, as the polarised, opposites of the dialectic.
And it was the necessarily progressive movement of the dialectic that was to ensure the victory of the first over the second, the success of the revolution.
Only, of course, if the philosophy itself is unquestionably right.
The case against it is precisely that it purports to explain the whole of history and, for that matter, of pre-history, by reference to a total system, and so denies to any of its implicated parts (social, economic, racial, geographical, religious and so on) as well as to the actions of its great or good men any separate authenticity.
Given the system, neither those parts nor those men may be said to have conditioned or influenced history.
Rather, history has conditioned  them.
The claim, in short, is that history is programmed; and programmed as progress.
The objection to the claim is that it is mere assertion or, more kindly, an act of faith.
More, that even if it chances to be true, the further claim to have discovered the programme is incredibly courageous, the courage that of enormous intellectual conceit.
And when the programme as exposed by the discoverer is seen to have been falsified by history, what in Marx was bravery becomes in latter-day Marxism mere bravado.
For an unrepentant Hegel, called back to Earth and observing that the two most conspicuous antinomies were the opposed superpowers, might well persist in preferring his perception that nation-states were the vehicle of the dialectic.
He might add that, if there had ever been any prospect that the class war would provide its movement, that prospect had patently disappeared except, ironically, in those eastern European countries bound to submit to Russian supervision.
There, the opposed classes were on the one hand the government and its apparatus; and on the other, the governed.
There in the German Democratic Republic in 1953, in Hungary in 1956, in Czechoslovakia in 1968, in Poland in 1980, the governed had risen against the government, workpeople against the apparatus.
The risings had been repressed by Russian military intervention, actual or threatened.
Quoting from The Times , he would agree that, as applied in Poland, Marxism had created a proletariat disposed to ‘revolutionising practice’ inspired by those who could not take advantage of the widespread corruption through which a black economy, supported by western currency, operates to mitigate the sheer harshness of a regime of scarcity.
‘It was’, he would read, ‘inevitable that the Solidarity revolution was sparked off by the Gdansk shipyard workers.
Nobody bribes such workers…nor do they have access to hard currency’.
To our interjection that on the evidence from Poland and other European countries under Russian domination, applied Marxism had neither created the wealth nor allowed the freedom to enable the purpose, as it is perceived in the democratic west, of the State to be realised — that is, to provide the circumstances in which the individual may most fully live a life of his or her own and so fulfill his or her potential for awareness and creativity, he would reply that that perception was mistaken; and go on to remind us that he had attached supreme importance to the State.
It was still his view that it did not, as the Liberals apparently continued to contend, exist for the interest of individuals.
The intervention by Russia, one of the  two super-powers through which the dialectic would operate, to suppress uprisings irrelevant to the operation, was only to be expected — and morally justified.
In summary, his view that the State was the instrument through which the dialectic operated was evidently right; and Marx's view that it operated through class warfare as evidently wrong.
But if, having served a term in purgatory, if having had the chance to try his arguments on other philosophers, Hegel was not unrepentant, he might agree that there was perhaps something in the alternative view: that each of the factors affecting historical development does have its own authenticity; that they act upon and react to one another; that from time to time this or that factor will take on a greater or lesser importance; that of course — with a nod in the direction of Marx — at least since the neolithic age and the development of agriculture the mode of production has been a major factor; and that the actions of particular men, Marx among them, have in fact been formative, changing not merely the degree of development of a kind already prescribed by a programme of social evolution, but the kind of development itself.
He might even agree that, perhaps after all, in the formation of opinion, of the choice of the direction in which a society is to move, the moral unit is the individual; and, therefore, that a kind of organisation which accounts to opinion and responds to the consensus is more securely founded than one which rests moral perception and authority in the organisation itself.
He might, in short, agree that democracy was to be preferred and its extension to be sought.
That the actions of particular men have determined the character and not merely the pace of the development of human society introduces the biological objection to Marxism.
Darlington argues persuasively that Marx believed the process of evolution to be by direct Lamarkian and not by indirect Darwinian, or selective means: that is to say, that the environment in which individuals found themselves operated directly upon them to adjust them to it and that the adjustments were transmitted by them to the next generation; and not that, fortuitous mutations having occurred in the genetic package, they would when favourable equip the mutant for greater success in the given environment than the unmutated form could achieve.
Hence, for Marx the biological laws governing the evolution of society were similarly simple and direct; and, in consequence, he failed to show ‘an awareness of the causes and consequences of individuality, an awareness conforming entirely to  the genetic understanding of today’.
And on Marx's notion of the class struggle, Darlington adds: No support here then for the necessity of the class war between proletariat and bourgeoisie, to be fought to its revolutionary finish.
On the contrary, the conclusion is that co-operation between mutually dependant classes is the long-term condition of the survival of stratified societies.
And further: We can, in summary, at the very least draw this conclusion: that it is, by reference to modern biological thought, a tenable view of society which — so long as its component classes are not exclusive — sees advantage to it in the variety of aptitudes and attitudes implied by class structure in a mixture of co-operation and competition between them.
So, the economic, philosophical and biological criticism of Marxism all point in the same direction: that though ‘muddled Mr Owen’ was, of course, wrong in supposing that sweet reasonableness and an appeal to the best in human nature would, following the organisation into general unions of workers in productive industry, enable them to take control of it; and further, by thus reconstituting society as an industrial democracy, remove its evils and usher in an era of plenty and universal happiness, he was not wrong because a clear-sighted Mr Marx's alternative was right.
It is one thing for Marx to have seen that Owen's vision was millennial.
It is another to suppose that Marx's was not.
A contrary view is that ‘Marx united Romantic and working-class protest with the Jewish Messianic tradition to make them powerful elements in his ‘scientific’ socialism'.
The truth, both for Owen and Marx, is likely to be this: that in the pervasive optimism of the time, it was  natural for the revolutionary to suppose that the change to usher in the new order was at hand, whether prompted by an Owenite vision of human perfectibility or by the culminatory movement of the perfecting Marxist dialectical materialism.
Since both were wrong, it is of little practical significance that where the one saw the change stealing upon the scene like a thief in the night, the other envisaged the proletariat oppressed beyond further endurance rising in response to the call to the class war to enforce the change.
For if, as we have seen, the vacuity at the heart of Owen's prospectus was the tacit assumption that owners, having seen the light, would agreeably acquiesce in the expropriation of their property in order that it would be beneficially used by the workers, that at the heart of Marx's was that the proletariat would as the movement of the dialectic ordained, seize the means of production.
In this, as much as in its expectation of the proximity of the event and of the brave new world that the event would introduce, Marx's vision was as millenarian as Owen's.
It was as millenarian because there was no tension in the mainspring of the mechanism, in the idea of the alienation of labour.
Let us look at the idea.
In present everyday usage the phrase could be understood to mean quite simply that capital, or more precisely, the people disposing of it, treats labour, or more precisely, the people employed, so badly as to create resentment.
The word in Marx's German text is die Entfremdung .
A literal translation would be estrangement .
No real difference from alienation, then; and given that the outcome whether of alienation or estrangement is to be the class war carried to the point of revolution and expropriation, perhaps the simple understanding is good enough.
Yet this would be to miss the essence of the point Marx seeks to make: for bad treatment by employers of employees is open to correction by moral conviction whether that of the employers themselves acting in pursuance of enlightened self-interest, or that of legislatures acting to prevent abuses; and the simple understanding would, by introducing the possibility of an extrinsic and corrective moral factor, threaten the inevitability of the class war.
Whether they did so because they ought to or because they were obliged to, so long as employers treated employees only just well enough, there need be no struggle between them.
So, some other understanding of alienation is required to validate it as the dynamic which establishes a proletariat and a property-owning bourgeoisie as Marx's two antinomies predestined to engage in that life-and-death struggle; and Marx seeks to provide it by postulating alienation as intrinsic.
On that view, institutional forms created by men to suit their common or social needs at a particular point in time take on a being of their own.
They come to be seen as existing in their own right; so that, even when they have ceased to serve their original social purpose and have become an impediment to the progress of society, men continue to defer to them.
Thus, under the capitalist dispensation, the social values of work — common objectives, common interests, the communion of shared experience and achievement — are lost because that dispensation requires the concentration of the means of production into the hands of one class, the property-owners; and the exploitation by them of another, the proletariat.
Work, or labour, the activity which, in Marx's view, governs social relationships and provides the means of the individual's self-fulfilment, has become ‘alienated’— or perhaps better, dissociated — from men and its values attributed to the system of production.
His detailed description of the identifying characteristics of alienation is instructive.
They are: It all depends on what you mean by work.
The objectionable characteristics Marx finds in alienated work are, almost all of them, as much present in work done by a self-employed person as in work done by an employee for an employer.
Drudgery, monotony, fatigue, mental frustration, physical discomfort — all are the same in either case.
Self-employment is by no means the guarantee of self-fulfilment, nor of the satisfaction of a need rather than the means of satisfying other needs.
And what, too, of the work done by one half of the human race ever since the species emerged: the work of the housewife?
Is that alienated labour?
Presumably not: but it would be a very bold man, a Karl Marx indeed who would assert that, for each and every woman and always, housework is her spontaneous activity, that it is the satisfaction of a need; or that she fulfils herself in it; or that through it she develops freely a physical and mental energy and will not be physically exhausted and mentally debased.
The truth is that there are disagreeable aspects to nearly all work; that what is regarded as disagreeable in work will vary from person to person and, within one person, from mood to mood; and that, in the end, the distinction to be made is simply but none the less crucially that the disagreeable features are more readily tolerated when the worker is working for himself than when he is working for someone else.
The give-away in Marx's description of alienation is the reference to leisure.
Only, he says, during his leisure does the worker feel himself at home.
Are we to understand that all work, when not alienated, is to provide the same freedom for the creative development of mind and feeling as do those pursuits we may choose to follow when our time is our own?
If so, the only rational response is plain disbelief.
Or are we to suppose that Capitalism having been displaced by Socialism in the Marxist version, work with all the disagreeable characteristics which turn it into toil or boredom will have been reduced to the bare minimum necessary to sustain society and that a consequent and vast increase in the leisure will enable us to fulfil ourselves?
If so, the point for attention is not alienation at all.
It is too much work: or, more precisely, too much time spent by too many people on work of a kind which contributes insufficiently to their fulfilment and which may tend to diminish their capacity for fulfilling themselves, too much soul-destroying toil or boredom.
Isaiah Berlin has pointed to the uncertainty in Marx's attitude to this ‘the most central of all the concepts of his system’ and to his failure to reconcile the two views he expresses: the one, that in unalienated labour there is perfect freedom for the fullest realisation of human potential and happiness; the other, that ‘the  need for this minimum of toil is an inescapable fact of physical nature which it is mere Utopianism to hope to conjure away’.
Yet, among its symptoms listed by Marx in his description of alienation, one — the fact that the work is not done for the worker but for someone else, that ‘in his work he does not belong to himself but to another person….
It is another's activity and a loss of his own spontaneity’— remains of special relevance.
For it is one thing to deny the significance Marx attaches to alienation as the prime impulse to class struggle; and quite another to identify it, cleaned of its Hegelian war-paint, as we have identified it already: as the abstraction of one's working life from a life of one's own.
The condition to which this particular symptom relates is the collapse of morale, the ingredient which is three-quarters of the game.
And the most complete cure, the structural cure, is the adoption in manufacturing and service industry of that form of organisation which extends the application of democratic principle into industry; which, by offering as of right equality of esteem, reward related to participation and responsibilities which go with ultimate authority, appeals to self-respect and self-discipline: the adoption, in short, of the industrial co-operative form.
That cure is not, of course, available east of the Iron Curtain.
For it was precisely such a measure of reform, heralded in the Prague Spring of 1968 as ‘Communism with a human face’ and containing the germ of the industrial co-operative idea, that was denounced as, revisionism'.
And, in the twentieth century, revisionism occupies much the same place in the Soviet Russian construction of Marxism as did heresy in the medieval church.
The revision proposed that works councils should be set up in order to vest in the workers a measure of control as against the bureaucratic command of the central planning authority.
No one considering the outcome could continue under the illusion that the co-operative form of organisation, as it is recognised in the west, can exist in any country the political constitution of which is modelled on the Soviet Russian derivative from Marxism.
For there, control over the means and amount of production vests by doctrine in a central authority; and the idea that the ownership of particular factories or plants by the people who work in them, of accountability to those people, and of ultimate control by those people, is grossly incompatible with that doctrine.
And more: the political bureaucracy, the ‘Nomenklatura’ as Voslensky calls the three million or so people he numbers in the Soviet ruling class has the  most powerful reason of self-interest for opposing ‘revisionism’.
It might well revise them out of positions of privilege and power.
Proceeding as it does from dogma, the Marxist pronouncement on Owen and the idea of the industrial co-operative considered as an extension of democracy is a verdict from which there is no appeal.
By contrast, the pronouncement of empirical Socialism on him is diffident.
Not that the Webbs, to whom we must first turn for an authoritative opinion, think that well of him.
It was some fifty years after the short-lived high point in Owen's career that they started their work, when in the 1880s and 1890s much of the constitutional reform sought by Owenism's eldest child, Chartism, had already been secured.
In response to a pervasive loss of faith in mid-Victorian economic liberalism, a string of measures had been put through Parliament by Conservative and Liberal Governments in concession to the case against unregulated laissez-faire and for intervention on social grounds by the state.
Sir William Harcourt had declared ‘We are all Socialists now’; and in 1894, as Chancellor of the Exchequer in a Liberal Government had introduced graduated income tax and death duties, so activating the principle of redistributive taxation.
In short, though not yet fully attained, political democracy had become respectable, and Socialism had become arguable.
The Webbs and their fellow Fabians were able to present democratic Socialism as the vehicle of evolutionary and moderate reform and as an extension to national administration of a practice already prevalent at municipal level.
Seaman comments that that presentation  Another and concordant view is recorded by Lichtheim: Lichtheim goes on to quote Pease, then Secretary of the Fabian Society, as saying: ‘We were thus in a position to welcome the formation of working class Socialist societies, but it is certain that they would never have welcomed us’; and to add, perhaps unkindly: ‘Beatrice Potter — a rich, spoiled, arrogant young woman with more beauty than brains — was determined to have as little as possible to do with the working class.’
It is not unfair, then, to see the Webbs and the other early Fabians as they seem to have seen themselves: as philosopher-kings concerned to persuade people of sufficient education and standing to see Socialism through Fabian eyes and so to behold its full beauty.
It would be unfair not to recall that they did, in the long term, have a formative influence on the social history of the United Kingdom.
Among their criticisms of Owen they placed his failure, as they saw it, to anticipate the economic centrepiece of Fabian thinking: the theory of rent.
This sought to demonstrate a concept of surplus which, taking besides labour other inputs — land, skill and ability, capital — into account, did not rely upon Ricardo's labour theory of value; but went on to conclude that, under Capitalism, the inputs are not rewarded by reference to the parts they play in the creation of wealth and that labour in particular did not get its fair share.
Thus fortified, the Webbs decried both Owen and Marx for depending on the labour theory of value.
Owen was, they declared: Did they, one wonders, ponder on the words ‘illustrious disciple’ as they dismissed Marx to the second rank of the misled and misleading who had got their economics so grossly wrong?
And did they reflect that they, who had not merely mastered but discovered the much more difficult law, who had got their economics so impregnably right, would be seen to stand shining brightest of all in the very front rank?
However that may be, Marxists are said to regard the theory of rent as ‘a quaint attempt to bypass the analysis of capitalism as a dynamic system propelled forward by its own internal contradictions’.
And, if they have read the passage, they might well be forgiven for entering it as further evidence, if evidence were needed, in support of their view that evolutionary Socialism is anathema and its proponents the prime enemy.
But that was not the whole of the Webbs' criticism of Owen's grand project for the reconstitution of the economy as a set of nationwide industrial co-operatives, one for each trade or industry.
They contrast his intention to supersede capitalists and managers by the elected representatives of voluntary and sectional associations of producers with ‘the modern Socialist proposal to substitute the officials of the Municipality or State’ which would, they recognise, have been ‘unthinkable at a period when all local governing bodies were notoriously inefficient and corrupt and Parliament practically an oligarchy’.
Having thus identified the right way to do the job and explained why it was not practically possible for Owen to adopt it, they then proceed to attack the substance of his proposal.
It would not, they say, have abolished competition: his ‘Grand Lodges’, each directing its own industry, would in effect have been the head offices of huge joint stock companies owning the entire means of production and subject to no control by the community; and they would have been able to revert to the capitalist form of enterprise, admitting fresh generations of workers only as employees and not as shareholders ‘thus creating at one stroke a new capitalist class and a new proletariat’.
More, shareholders would have been able to dispose of shares whether in order to spend their capital or to buy into more profitable businesses, thus creating a speculative stock market.
The summary of the Webbs' view is that, by contrast with their model of Socialism, Owen's scheme — if it could have been carried out — would have done no more than redistribute the capital of the country without altering or superseding the capitalist system in the least.
After noting that, in Owen's expectation, passive resistance — that is, the ‘sacred holiday month’ or, in modern parlance, a general strike — would bring his new order of society painlessly into being, they next regret the persistence of the idea that Trade Unions, as Associations of Producers, should recover control of the instruments of production, an idea which they call ‘Joint Stock Individualism’and which, they note, has scarcely been eradicated from the minds of the idealists of the trade union movement.
And that, we are to understand, will never, never do.
Finally, the Webbs distinguish stigmatised ‘Joint Stock Individualism’ from the ‘demonstrably successful Co-operative Production of the Associations of Consumers which constitutes the Co-operative Movement of today’.
So there we have it.
Trade unions should confine themselves to the business of wages and conditions.
Co-operation is the Consumer Movement.
Production incidental to it is identified as ‘Co-operative Production’.
Demonstrably successful — at the time — yes: but demonstrably co-operative?
And how far is their insistence on the complete separation of the functions of trade unionism from those of Co-operative Production conditioned by the earlier Fabian conviction that the principal prerequisite for the beneficial restructuring of society was public ownership, municipal or national, of the means of production and provision?
For in fact, Co-operation does not fit comfortably into the Webbs' conception of Socialism.
It can be regarded as private ownership at least as readily as it can public ownership.
What it most certainly is not, is ownership by national or local public authority: and because it does not look to the Government as its banker and so imposes no liability on the public sector borrowing requirement, it provides no levers for a hypothetical State economic planning agency to handle.
Nor, more modestly, does it provide any reason why the Treasury, responsible for the ultimate public obligation to pick up the bill for public bodies which cannot be allowed to default, should exercise a prudential interest in its performance.
Incompatible therefore though a Co-operative sector would be with the Webbs' version of the fully Socialist economy, the incompatibility has not so far become obtrusive in the United Kingdom because Labour Governments, which incidentally have had the support of the Co-operative Party as the political arm of the Co-operative Consumer Movement, have carried western Socialist Empiricism to the point of settling for the mixed economy; and any central planning has been indicative — and, some would say, ineffectual — rather than mandatory.
So, in its relations with  Government, Co-operation as practised in this country functions as part of the private sector.
As for the Webbs' insistence on the separate and restricted role for trade unionism, the practical effect was, once again, to abandon industrial democracy, to accept that the rights of working people at work remained the rights inhering in the property they owned: their labour, and nothing more.
The prescription was to offer them no reason for distinguishing between employers who, as custodians for the State, managed those centre-pieces of Socialist attainment, the nationalised industries; and those who managed privately owned industries.
Also, it was bound to implicate Government deeply.
A role for trade unionism which continued to confine its main purpose to the sale of labour at the best price it could get for it was bound to prompt unions first to seek and then to exploit a monopoly of it; bound to make incongruent two prime objectives — full employment and a stable currency; and bound to present Government with reasons of national interest or excuses of ideology for intervening.
It is no surprise, therefore, that the history of the relations between Government and the trade union — movement has consisted so largely of intervention to harden or soften the market for the commodity at the movement's disposal.
Not that this is to say that no industry should be owned by the State, not even when, for example , a service to be provided is a natural monopoly; and the presumption is, therefore, that those who provide it should be accountable to users who cannot register dissatisfaction by taking their custom elsewhere, rather than to private owners whose interest is to exploit the monopoly.
It does, however, put the onus of proof, case by case, on those who would nationalise industry.
Perhaps this marks the single biggest difference between Marxist Socialism, and Empirical Socialism as it is now practised.
For the first, public ownership is a virtual absolute, the derogations from it minimal and the necessity for them requiring proof.
For the second, public ownership has become a question to be settled on the merits of the particular case.
Nor is it to say that none of the Webbs' criticisms of Owen is valid.
But some of them have worn badly.
Thus, to put the point at its mildest, it is by no means clear that the general abolition of competition is desirable, that the alternative of centrally planned provision and allocation will offer a more sensitive and efficient response to consumers' demands and wishes, or a better means of deploying resources.
So even if we agree that abolition was his  intention and that that intention would have failed, if we consider also that it was mistaken anyway, we need pursue the point no further, except to add this: granted that the evil of insufficiently regulated competition is that it leads ultimately to the vicious exploitation of employees, the point can hardly be made of industrial co-operatives.
The people working in them choose whether or not to ‘exploit’ themselves.
It is even less clear that industry, in general, should be ‘under the control of the community’.
A less ominous formulation would be ‘accountable to the community’; yet, formulate it as we may, the notion cannot confidently be said to afford a guarantee of efficiency, if the control or the accountability is to relate to its performance as business in operation.
Only on the assumption that public ownership, defined as ownership by the State or by the local authority is in the particular case an overriding need, does the requirement of accountability to the community arise.
And since that assumption is implicit in the Webbs' criticism of Owen, it cannot be understood too clearly that on their argument there can be no place at all for industrial co-operatives, properly so-called: no place, because the ownership, whether individual or collective, of an industrial co-operative rests in the people working in it.
And so, too, does the ultimate control.
In principle, there is the same incompatibility between the Webbs' prospectus of general public ownership and Consumer Co-operation as an aspect of private ownership; and since the Webbs' approval of consumer co-operatives makes them an exception, we need to know why.
A two-fold explanation suggests itself.
First, by the time that they were writing, Consumer Co-operation with its own production arm had been firmly established and was growing strongly.
It could be seen therefore as its own safeguard provided by the people against a particular form of exploitation of the people; and hence as something to be excepted on pragmatic grounds from the general case for nationalisation or municipalisation.
Second, within the Consumer Movement, the long-standing question whether its producer capacity should be developed as independent industrial co-operatives and hence under the control of the people working in them, or whether it should be treated as incidental to the consumer co-operatives and accountable to them, had, as we have seen, been decided once and for all in favour of the latter alternative.
How, then, are we now to see the Webbs' appraisal of Owen?
First, as a criticism of the sheer impracticability of the grandiose  project Owen had in 1833 put to the Grand Moral Union of the Productive Classes and which still survived in the objectives though not in the activities of its even shorter-lived successor, the Grand National Consolidated Trade Union, the Webbs' case succeeds.
It succeeds, too, as a condemnation of his messianic presentation which inspired in those, having little cause for hope and much for despair, an all-too-ready belief in an easily-obtained and immediate millennium.
But as a general attack upon industrial co-operatives as a means of organising production and provision, it is ill-founded and ill-considered: ill-founded, because it proceeds from the unproven principle that the public ownership of industry was a necessary pre-requisite of the good society; and ill-considered, because it ignored the democratic virtues — accountability to and responsibility from the workforce — of the industrial co-operative form.
It pointed instead to a new meritocracy indistinguishable for all practical purposes from the old autocracy, but writ sometimes smaller, sometimes larger.
In that meritocratic future, working people would remain the proletariat, managed in their lives by meritocrats whose intentions would, of course, be benevolent.
Confined to their present role, trade unions would remain a response to the exploitation, actual or hypothetical, of employees by employers — a response which meritocratic benevolence would, if performance matched intention, progressively reduce to a satisfied silence.
Work-people would not be expected to reason why, but to go on doing until they retired.
The world would have become one fit for philosopher-kings to manage.
It has not turned out that way, of course.
Nor was it likely to have done.
For, in its guise as the Parliamentary Labour Party, British Empirical Socialism cannot be said to have intended, when governing the country, to have replaced private ownership of industry wholly by public ownership.
And just as well: because, however persuasive the case for the public ownership of particular industries, experience since 1945 can hardly be said to bear out the general case, the proposition that public ownership is the necessary precursor to the realisation of the rights of man.
There is, too, the appalling possibility that the corrupting tendency of power would operate to turn a meritocracy into a Nomenklatura .
My main point is, though, not simply that the Webbs' own general prospectus was wrong, nor even that it misdirected their appraisal of Owen.
Rather, it is this: that in its failure to comprehend the essential quality of the industrial co-operative or, as they put it, Producer Co-operation, that appraisal displays a vitiating absence of imagination.
It does not comprehend that the case for the co-operative form is its respect for the individual man or woman, a respect that is intrinsic to the form because the mainstay of its structure is equality of esteem.
‘One man, one vote’ is not merely a slogan.
It is an assertion of the dignity of humanity.
And the man in question is not a philosophical or statistical abstraction from reality, but the reality itself; not a theoretician's concept to play a mechanical part in a Marxist phenomenology of history or a philosopher-king's model of ideal society, but flesh and blood; the thinking and feeling individual whose right it is to make his life, including his working life, as fully as possible his own in a society the essential purpose of which should be to maximise his chances of doing so.
Further, the Webbs' gross failure of comprehension is complemented by their advocacy of an apparatus of state and municipal ownership, and of a bureaucratic management such as might have been deliberately designed not to maximise those chances.
So, the Marxist and the Empirical Socialist prospectuses according to the Webbs both point to State ownership, in general, with its attendant bureaucracy, and to the separation of society into two classes, the governors and the governed.
But between the practice of the two, the difference of degree is so great as to amount to a difference in kind.
In those countries where it prevails, Marxist absolutism has led to the suppression of individuality to the point where dissent and criticism are crimes against the State and punishable by imprisonment or by internal exile, or madness to be treated in mental hospitals; where art and science must conform to the State's perception of their supportive purposes; where the measure of morality is no longer‘what if this day thy soul is required of thee?’ but ‘does it serve the system?’
By contrast, empirical tentativity need not pursue objectives beyond the point where they cease to produce their expected social benefit.
Nor will it do so in countries where genuine political democracy is firmly established and the electorate will no longer support the objectives.
Empirical Socialism may be supposed to have judged that that point had been reached in western Europe by the 1960s.
Douglas Jay quotes the Swedish, Dutch, Swiss, West German and Austrian Socialist parties as admitting the desirability of privately owned production, competition and the market economy.
And he quotes eminent British Socialists to show that  competition and, by inference, the price mechanism are admissible features in a socialist landscape.
There is not, however, among those he quotes the same unambiguous acceptance of the private ownership of the means of production as appears in the pronouncements by the continental Socialist parties.
There is a clear consensus that the case for the public ownership and management by State corporations of whole industries was limited; and, further, that the objective was not nationalisation for its own sake, but the need to bring economic enterprise under social control — whatever that means.
In a statement made in 1952, Aneurin Bevan comes closest to the continental view.
He is quoted as saying: This formulation left it open to those in the electorate who were disenchanted with nationalisation to suppose that there would be little if any more, and to those on the left wing of the Labour Party to expect that there would still be a lot.
Still, set it beside the earliest of the quotations, from the Webbs' A Constitution for the Socialist Commonwealth of Great Britain , dating from 1920, and we can see how far the Empirical Socialist view had changed.
Thus the Webbs: Splendid stuff, especially for the experimenters, observers and verifiers: but stuff, nevertheless.
For since the pronouncement is not about debatable ends but unexceptionable means, no one should find difficulty in applauding its purport — that well-ventilated administration is a condition of healthy government.
As evidence for the empirical attitude of British Socialism as exemplified in the Labour Party, it may perhaps be allowed to stand.
But its greater significance is as a bench mark serving to show how far the Labour Party, influenced by experience in government and by the pressure of opinion in a political democracy, had revised its prospectus.
For empiricists, revisionism is no heresy; and heresy no bad thing, anyway.
What, however, the revision shows no sign of at all is any advance from the Webbs' dismissive view of Industrial Co-operation.
It remains first to say that neither Marxism, nor Empirical Socialism in the Webbs' versions of it, anticipated Keynes's General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money .
If, as Marxism postulates, the final catastrophe of Capitalism is to be triggered by a crisis of under-utilisation of capacity and of over-supply of goods, then the General Theory provides the remedy: a positive investment policy by the State and deficit financing in certain circumstances.
And since the effect would be to put off the catastrophe indefinitely, since Capitalism could now continue by reason of policies which provided also a solution to the problem of unemployment, Empirical Socialism need no longer distinguish itself from the Marxist version solely by the method and pace of change, by being evolutionary rather than revolutionary.
Where in 1931 early Fabian economics, with its ‘impregnable’ theory of rent, had no answer either to the crisis or the problem, in the twenty-five years from 1945 the application by Governments of Keynesian principles led to an unprecedented creation of wealth and a remarkable rise in living standards.
We had never had it so good.
The necessity for the complete displacement of Capitalism by public ownership having gone, Empirical Socialism could well embrace the mixed economy.
That the embrace was electorally opportune must be admitted.
That it was mere opportunism may be denied.
Yet, Empirical Socialism did not have to wait for Keynes to propound the idea of demand-led growth as the solution to the recurrent crises in Capitalism.
After all, Owen had proposed something of the sort a century before.
The Webbs' failure to pick up the proposal would have been forgivable but for one thing; and  that is their criticism of his failure to comprehend before they were born their theory of rent — a theory which, whatever might be its academic merits, provided no practical help to Governments.
Or to the unemployed.
And it remains finally to ask what place there was for trade unionism in the Labour Party's revised prospectus.
The answer is: industrial democracy.
In the 1960s, the idea had resurfaced — though not in a form that Owen would have recognised as remotely related to that that he had advocated.
There is the irony: that, just when British Empirical Socialism had come to terms with the idea of a mixed economy, when it had accepted that for the indefinite future a public sector and a private sector would co-exist, when the tangle of objections which the Webbs had seen to the development of a privately-owned industrial co-operative sector had been so far cleared away as to open the path to a natural growth of industrial democracy by a means which, because it reconciled the rights and interests of labour with those of ownership, would have been sustainable, the Labour Government ignored or overlooked the opportunity.
It preferred to insist that industrial democracy should be imposed by a means that had to be in principle unsustainable: that is, by the appointment of representatives of trade unions to the boards of directors of industrial enterprises.
Thus, falling into the technocrats' natural sin, it mistook administrative device for organic substance.
It proposed a shot-gun marriage between two parties who, so far from having anticipated the bliss of that honourable estate, had ventured nothing much more than the frozen smile of recognition that passes for politeness between opponents who see in one another much to dislike and little to love.
It wrote the terms of reference of the Committee of Enquiry on Industrial Democracy.
THE FALSE START
As is customary, The Committee of Enquiry on Industrial Democracy, chaired by Lord Bullock, opened its Report by reciting its remit.
It had been set up ‘to advise on questions relating to representation at board level in the private sector’ with the following terms of reference: Here, then, was a proposal to promote industrial democracy in a particular specification.
By the fortunes of politics, it has been dismissed from the scene.
By the same fortunes, it might be  recalled.
For that reason, as well as for the attention it requires of any interested in the subject, it needs to be considered.
And since the case for the development of an industrial co-operative sector stands primarily on its merit as the practice of industrial democracy, we have now to ask whether the proposals contained in the majority Report of the Bullock Committee are a valid and, if so, a preferable alternative.
There are two things to note at once about the remit.
First, it excludes the public sector, that is to say, the nationalised industries.
Whether intentionally or not, the effect of the exclusion was to dodge for the time being a major constitutional problem.
This we shall return to.
The second notable point is the one which, when the remit was published, led to much criticism of it, and which is registered in paragraph 1 of the minority report signed by three of the nine members remaining from the ten who at the outset composed the Committee: Certainly, the terms of reference specified industrial democracy as an extension of the activities of trade unions into the control of enterprises, other than public sector enterprises, by which the members of those unions were employed.
The defence and advancement of the interests of their members as employees, traditional functions of trade unions, were to remain their principal raison d'être .
What the remit conspicuously ignores is the possibility that a change, as radical as the intended extension of industrial democracy, but in the essential character of trade unions might also be a need if they were to play the new part written for them.
The new wine might need new bottles.
So, for the remit's specification of industrial democracy, the rationale has to be this: that officials or, for that matter, ordinary members of the union, elected or deputed to represent it on a board of directors, would be accountable to the membership which would replace them if it judged their performance to be unsatisfactory.
But unsatisfactory in what respect: as representatives of a body established to negotiate on behalf of employees with management acting on behalf of owners; or as representatives of the union but charged, along with representatives of the owners, with the corporate responsibility for the performance of the enterprise?
The two kinds of responsibility do not coincide.
They are liable to be, and often are, in conflict.
There is no escaping the fact that a trade union will, in pursuit of its purposes as they are commonly understood, have its own corporate policies; and that the authority of members of a trade union appointed in that capacity to boards of directors of joint stock companies will derive from the trade union.
And it is to the trade union that they would have to account for the exercise of that authority.
A board of directors could not exist and act as a corporate entity if it were composed of two groups of people, each deriving its authority from and answerable to a different principal body, the one liable to be in conflict with the other; for it would in fact be a negotiating committee.
Of course there would be some non-contentious business, perhaps quite a lot; but even then, there must also be the reservation that nothing should be disclosed by the one group to the other which might prejudice its case when the business was contentious.
It is no good insisting that, so long as you look at it with your eyes closed, a pig's ear is a silk purse after all.
So, only if the trade union representatives were not, whether actually or in effect, appointed by the union or, if appointed by it were neither accountable to it nor liable to be dismissed by it would that difficulty be avoided, at least in principle.
But then it is hard to see how that arrangement could be described as, or even contribute to, industrial democracy.
The reality that there are rights of ownership and that they are liable to, and do, conflict with those of labour cannot be exorcised by pretending that they are not there; and it is the exclusion of the public sector from the Committee's purview which admits that reality.
A nationalised industry is owned by the State.
The public corporation in which its assets are vested and which is charged with the conduct of the business, is accountable to Parliament.
The Secretary of State at the head of its sponsoring Department of State must lay its annual report and accounts before Parliament which may debate them and which may, if it thinks fit, call the Chairman and others before a select committee, examine them and report on their performance.
Thus, Members of Parliament may  be said to occupy much the same position with respect to the nationalised industries as do shareholders with respect to a joint stock company.
And though, by a well-established convention, Members do not ask Ministers questions about the day-to-day conduct of the industries' affairs, since that is by definition not government business, they may very well ask him about a matter that most certainly is: about the appointments Ministers make to the boards of nationalised industries.
If there is continuing disquiet about the way an industry is being run, Members can express their disquiet by questioning the fitness of the persons appointed by the Government to run it.
Because the Government appoints the board, Members can if they are not satisfied with its performance, seek changes in its composition.
So by this means, the interest of ownership in the performance of the business owned can assert itself.
If, however, the authority to make appointments to the board of a nationalised industry did not reside solely in Government, but in part in trade unions as the instruments of industrial democracy, the Secretary of State could no longer be held responsible for the fitness of the board to discharge its functions; and it would no longer be meaningful for Members to ask Questions, nor possible for Government to answer them constructively.
In short, the ownership by the State of nationalised industries requires accountability to Parliament.
Accountability to Parliament requires the appointment of persons to the boards of nationalised industries to be, in law and in fact, the act of Government.
If a power of appointment, either in law or in fact, is vested in trade unions, the effect is not only to arrogate to them rights attaching only to ownership, but to establish them in this particular matter as the constitutional equals of Parliament.
The issue is indeed a major constitutional one.
In practice, the result at best would be the confusion which must result when two bodies serving different purposes and interests are equally the ultimate custodians; and the large probability is that there could be no effective accountability at all.
So it was advisedly that the terms of reference excluded the public sector.
Nevertheless, behind the constitutional difficulty that its inclusion would have imported, the substantive and quite general point remains: industrial democracy as specified in the terms of reference of the Bullock Committee is not compatible with the rights of ownership.
However, what an owner sees as his due rights may be seen by others as undue privilege; and where the general interest is  material enough to insist on the second alternative, it may with whatever necessary degree of consideration and justice, seek to override the first.
Given the terms of reference, those who signed the majority Report might well have supposed that that part of the argument had been decided.
The question was ‘how’ and not ‘whether’; and what was required of them was not a justification of the ends, but a formulation of the means.
So it is especially a matter for satisfaction that the signatories nevertheless provided a chapter in support of the specified objective.
It is Chapter 3, ‘The pressures for change’.
And if in places it reads tendentiously or relies overmuch on rhetoric, it could hardly do otherwise than echo the tendentiousness and rhetoric of the terms of reference themselves.
Anyway, it is in Chapter 3 that is mainly to be sought any justification for the conclusion, in advance of the Committee's work, that industrial democracy in the particular form specified by the remit was necessary or desirable in the general interest.
The chapter opens by recalling that the term ‘industrial democracy’ was first used by the Webbs in 1897 as the title of their book on the structure and functions of trade unions.
But, it continues, since the Second World War there has been ‘a shift of emphasis in the use of the term’.
What it is about now is ‘the need to involve employees to a greater extent in company decision making’.
A shift of emphasis?
Here the expression may, as so often, be read to blur the fact of a change of substance, to present a difference of kind as though it were only a modest difference of degree.
For the Webbs' prescription for Socialism was ownership and control by the State or municipality of the means of production or provision, the control to be exercised in the general interest.
For them, the sovereignty of the consumer was the overriding consideration.
Even in industrial co-operatives, that consideration ruled out control by employees, and so confined the trade unions to their traditional concerns.
Most surely, the Webbs would have seen the omission of the industries of the public sector from the Committee's terms of reference as evidence of the flaw in them.
Anyway, the perceived need since 1945 is said in the Report to have been ‘to involve employees to a greater extent in company decision making’ whatever involvement involves or a greater extent extends to.
The general sentiment is so unexceptionable as to be positively sedative.
It is only when the reader wakes up that he wonders what it means.
But he may yet be enlightened.
For the chapters goes on to record the developments which had  prompted a recognition of the need for that involvement, starting with those it identifies as industrial and economic changes.
They are: first, the growth of giant industrial enterprises and the concentration of economic power in fewer of them.
In the result, decisions affecting the lives of thousands are taken by people remote from them.
Next, quoting the Confederation of British Industries, the chapter rehearses the view that companies have a duty to take account of the interest of employees and should develop effective systems of employee participation.
Then it turns to the effect of the ‘managerial revolution’; that is, it says, to concentrate power in the hands of directors and to withdraw power from ineffective and acquiescent shareholders who only exercise it at times of crisis.
There follows the observation that the need for responsiveness to rapid technological change and fluctuating economic climate requires management to involve employees in the process of making decisions, if only for the practical reason that there will be great difficulty in carrying through decisions against resistance by trade unions.
The comment that all of this prompts is first, that it amounts to no more than the well-understood case for good personnel management in conventionally organised manufacturing or service industry.
And except in one particular, it applies with equal force to nationalised industries.
The exception is, of course, in the pronouncement that shareholders have in effect surrendered their power to professional management, a pronouncement which does not so much face the central question of the rights of ownership as to try to pass it by.
For it invites the view that the powers attaching to the rights have largely fallen into abeyance and may, therefore, the more readily be disregarded.
As a case, therefore, for the extension of industrial democracy defined as the kind of consultation practised, the worker-participation sought by good personnel management, it is to be applauded.
But as a case for a ‘radical extension’ of industrial democracy by means requiring the assumption by unreformed trade unions of rights which had hitherto attached only to ownership, it merits at this point no more than a suspended judgment at best.
Under the heading ‘Social changes’ the chapter says, in brief, that the deferential society is dead; and that ‘the coming of age of democracy in our society is a process that inevitably affects the whole of people's lives; it cannot be excluded from the workplace.’
This has something of the smack of a ‘like it or not’ pronouncement of the kind commonly declaimed by those who would have us suppose that opposition to things we do not like would be pointless.
More persuasive perhaps is the quotation from the EEC's Green Paper Employment Participation and Company Structure , to the effect that ‘the pursuit of goals other than economic growth, such as the improvement of the quality of life and working conditions, the protection of the environment and the interests of the consumer…can probably be secured only by the existence of decision-making processes in enterprises which have a broader, more democratic base than such processes often have at present.’
Well, yes: but much depends on what ‘a broader democratic base’ means.
Finally and, since it is presented as a statement of fact, unobjectionably, it records that there ‘has been an increasing desire among employees to control their working environment and to have a say in decisions which affect their working lives’.
Once again, what case is being supported?
It is easy to read it with approval as support for the view that management should be considerate of the well-being and interests of employees, and would be well-advised to promote their participation in the discussion of them.
If the purpose of this part of the chapter is to provide a platform for the proposition that, to use the Report's own words, management generally should ‘involve employees in decision-making, rather than impose decisions on them without consultation’, then it is as persuasive as is any declaration in favour of obvious good.
But if it is to serve as the platform for a conclusion that something else and qualitatively different is required, something to place authority, at least in part, for the conduct of a business owned by others in the hands of employees, then by itself the statement is not strong enough to bear the weight of the proposition.
The presentation is, once again, persuasively for extension.
It does nothing for ‘radical extension’.
Next in its review of the pressures for change, Chapter 3 turns to the growth of the functions of trade unions.
It refers first to the widening of the scope of collective bargaining to include subjects other than pay and conditions, citing as examples: the provision of time and office services for lay trade-union representatives; man-power planning; job and income security; and disclosure of information.
This it sees as evidence of the shop-floor pressures for greater industrial democracy.
There is some already.
There should be more — even if, on inspection, the examples cited can again be seen as part of or an extension of the practice of good personnel  management.
To this, however, it adds a further proposition.
Recent legislation, on employment protection by making provision for disclosure of information and advance consultation on redundancy, and on health and safety by bringing the subject into the sphere of joint regulation, is advanced as the basis for this declaration: ‘It can be argued indeed that the basis for a legislative framework designed to encourage industrial democracy at shop floor level already exists’.
Indeed it can: but whether the argument would carry any weight is another matter entirely.
To be fair, the majority report does not in so many words advance the argument.
It is content to let us follow it, if we want to do so.
And, last in this section comes a reference to the ‘emphasis of the industrial strategy on union involvement in company level planning together with new concepts like planning agreements.’
These are, the chapter says, creating new pressures for the extension of joint regulation which ‘inevitably raise the question whether existing institutions can be developed to provide for employee involvement at this level, or whether new institutions are needed.’
Well, at least this pops the question even though rather coyly.
New institutions might include boards of directors containing trade union members as such — just as the terms of reference, in ‘accepting the essential role of trade union organisations’, assumed.
But, what industrial strategy, whose industrial strategy?
What that reference does is invite the reader to compare unlikes.
Thus, we are prompted to suppose that an unspecified industrial strategy on the one hand is so like matters of health and safety for the purposes of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, or like employment protection for the purposes of the Employment Protection Act 1975 on the other, as to amount to much the same kind of thing as they are; and so to accept the view that, just as the second is a subject for joint regulation by management and unions or of prior discussion between management and unions, so too should the first.
But the two are unlike.
For while the health and safety, and the prospective redundancy of its members, are the union's business as of generally recognised right it is by no means clear that an industrial strategy that was anything more than a slogan would be.
For such a strategy must eventually require that resources at the disposal of people who own them will be applied in one way rather than another.
And it cannot be said that that is the union's business as of generally recognised right to decide, or to share in deciding, that application.
To influence, to seek to persuade, yes: to decide, no.
The  distinction is borne out by the Report's own reference to the disclosure of information, and prior consultation on redundancy.
Unions are to be given information; and consulted in advance.
Consulted: not invited to share in the decision whether redundancies are to be declared.
And it is hard to see how unions retaining the functions of protecting and advancing the interests of employees could be expected, or wish, to do so.
Whose side are they on?
Nor does the reference to planning agreements help the case; for an agreement is negotiated between two parties representing different interests.
Management accountable to owners cannot be expected to enter into meaningful agreements, planning or otherwise, which limit their freedom under the law to act in the best interest of the owners.
Few, if any, lasting planning agreements were made.
The fact is that all the examples adduced to support the proposition that there should be a qualitative — or ‘radical’— extension of the role of trade unions into the management of the business employing their members fail at the crucial oint.
None concedes the massive change of principle that such an extension would require.
On the contrary, they stop short of it.
They stop at consultation.
So far under this heading ‘trade union and legislative development’, as under the earlier headings, the case effectively stated remains the case for extension, within the existing dispensation, of the role of trade unions.
So far: but now it sounds a different note.
By reference to the TUC'S report on industrial democracy, it states the movement's own position as follows: that the development of participation at national and local level has left a gap at company level which can only be filled by employee representation on the company board.
Important though collective bargaining is as a method of extending employee influence at local level, there is a range of important decisions which it cannot by itself reach.
Then, quoting directly from the TUC's report: Here then is the quantum leap: not consultation, but control.
Representation at board level of the workers is declared, in effect, to be a natural right.
In a true political democracy, such a declaration is of course perfectly allowable; and none the less so for least that the general interest will not suffer from the exercise of the right; and that the loss or diminution of any other opposed rights can be justified.
This the quoted passage does not seek to do.
The persuasion rests on the assumptions that the forms of consultation practised and of participation prompted by the best employers are a measure of industrial democracy, but not enough: that the representation of employees on company boards is necessary to establish complete industrial democracy; that total industrial democracy, in this prescription, will so far improve industrial efficiency as to benefit materially the general interest; and that the implicit loss or diminution of the rights of ownership should not be allowed to preclude the realisation of that benefit.
Each of these assumptions is so questionable as to put the onus of proof very heavily on the trade unions.
And the conclusion must be that the unions failed utterly to make the case out.
They failed to persuade the electorate.
‘The coming of age of [political]democracy in our society’ was, in the event, marked in 1979 not by the return to office of the Labour Government which had written the terms of reference for the Bullock Committee, and to which the trade union movement might look for the advancement of industrial democracy as the movement had specified it.
It was marked by the election of a Conservative Government committed to reduce what it saw as the excessive powers and privileges of the movement.
Nor does the last reference in the chapter, the reference to continental European and, in particular, to Western German practice, help.
The Report observes: ‘It is now 25 years since Mitbestimmung (Co-determination) was introduced in the Federal Republic of Germany’; and again: ‘As long ago as 1972 the EEC published draft proposals for a Fifth Directive on Company law, proposing employee representation on the supervisory boards of all companies in the Community with over 500 employees’— a rhetorical presentation that pictures the United Kingdom as dragging its reluctant feet well in the rear of a party marching briskly along the path towards a bright new future entrusted not wholly but largely to trade unions.
Put the reality next to the  rhetoric and the case looks very different.
The winter of 1978–9 was the winter of discontent, the discontent of trade unions generally with the guidance contained in the White Paper, published in July 1978, on pay policy.
Paragraph 12 pronounced the key requirement: the Government's duty was, it said, to advocate a policy which would provide the best possible foundation for a further reduction in inflation, already reduced in the previous year from 17 per cent to around 8 per cent; an increase in jobs and output; and an improved standard of living.
To this end: In the Government's view, the total increase [in pay]for any group compared with the previous year…should not be more than 5 per cent.
Thus the Government proposed; but the trade union movement disposed.
Either it would not or it could not observe the policy.
If it would not, then it was irresponsibly careless of the general interest.
If it could not, then its claim to be one of the great estates in the land was greatly reduced.
Whichever alternative is right, the trade unions' bid for a share in the control of industry and, implicitly, to stand as an equal with Parliament as a body to which the nationalised industries should be accountable, could no longer be entertained.
They continued to be seen for what they continued to be: organisations concerned to get the highest wages and the best conditions they could for their members.
And when put to the test, they were nothing more.
If they would not or could not, at the request of a Government sympathetic to them and their aspirations, give sufficient support to the economic policy advocated by that Government in the general interest, it could not with confidence be supposed that trade union representatives on the boards of companies would give sufficient support to the policies of those companies.
The conclusion can only be this: that if a ‘radical extension’ of industrial democracy means the appointment of trade union representation to the boards of companies, then the case for it — always improbable in principle — has been shown by events to be insupportable.
Even if it had been otherwise, it still would not have followed that the unions should as of right share in the control of those resources they did not own: land and buildings, plant and equipment, and finance.
Their case would have been vastly more plausible; and a decisive electoral victory for the Labour Party might have been seen as a mandate for the promotion of industrial democracy in the trade unions' model of it, and as an implicit declaration of public opinion in favour of the consequential  abridgement or even abrogation of the rights of ownership.
Whether in the event owners would have consented is quite another question.
It must be very doubtful indeed whether, in a free society, property can be used otherwise than as those with title to it will allow.
They would be bound to see such a use as virtual expropriation, without compensation.
In the end, the account in Chapter 3 of the pressures for change amounts to an effective review of the recognition of the right of trade unions to be fully informed and consulted, in good time, by management about its intentions where they will or might affect the interests of employees organised by unions; and so may be said to provide a firm footing for the argument that the practice of providing full information and of engaging in full consultation should be extended and adopted generally, in order that unions may better consider, and act in pursuance of, those interests.
However, except in the reference to the TUC's report on industrial democracy, it provides no evidence of opinion in support of the recognition of a right for trade unions, acting on behalf of employees, to share with management, acting on behalf of owners, in the control of companies: that is to say, no evidence of opinion in support of a case for a ‘ radical extension’, as prescribed by the terms of reference, of the unions' role.
Indeed, it can almost be read as inviting the supposition that industrial democracy, in that prescription, differs only in degree from current practices of consultation; is to that extent already customary; and is therefore unobjectionable and, as a ‘democratic imperative’, inevitable.
But, read the chapter this way or that, if there was ever a case for recognising that unions have a right to share in the management of companies, that case depended critically upon a general expectation — amounting to a near-certainty — that, rather than give primacy to their sectional interests, unions would and could act in the general interest whenever it was necessary or desirable for them to do so.
And events since the Report have exposed the emptiness of any such expectation.
Two final points: first, except to imply that, because the rights of ownership in joint stock companies are rarely used, they can be discounted, the chapter offers nothing to support a conclusion that the reduction or abrogation of those rights, such as the ‘radical extension’ of the unions' role would require, would command general support, and second, it gives no guidance on the question whether that ‘radical extension’would create genuine industrial democracy.
But both points are referred to later in the Report.
The first, the implications for, and of, the rights of ownership, are not examined.
When it comes, in Chapter 6 ‘A review of some major issues’, to this point it simply declares: There is in this assertion more sound and flannel signifying not very much than there is substance.
Thus: are we to read ‘solely’ the property of shareholders as implying that it is in fact that, or can be, someone else's property?
Then again: ‘a complex social and economic entity’— how does this alter by one iota the hard fact that ownership, the title to property and the right to use it and to dispose of it, vests in the shareholders?
And how do ‘the variety of internal and external pressures’ alter that fact?
They may well limit the uses to which property may be put and hence affect its value, even to the point where owners may prefer not to allow it to be used at all; but they do not alter the fact that ownership confers the licence to use, or not to use.
And finally, the statement that ‘the powers of control have passed from the legal owners to professional management’: are we to infer that besides ‘legal’ ownership there is a kind of de facto ownership; that management appointed by owners are de facto owners; and that, because their members are employed in this or that particular company, trade unions should similarly be regarded as de facto owners?
What, anyway, does ‘control’ mean here?
It is so presented as to invite us to see no difference between on the one hand management appointed by, acting for, and accountable to owners, and on the other union representatives appointed by, acting for, and accountable to employees.
A neutral presentation would expose the difference and show that the delegation of authority does not imply the forfeiture of ultimate control.
It is not good enough to use language which blurs the sharp reality, as for example: ‘the ultimate control of the Company is seen in law as residing with the owners or shareholder’ as if to suggest that there is some other and valid way of seeing it, a way which may put the ultimate control, at least in part, elsewhere.
It is not as though the law  adopts, or still less, creates for its own peculiar purposes and processes a special view of ownership, one which is worth as much or as little as any other view.
Rather, it is an expression of the rights and liabilities generally held to attach to ownership: more exactly, the right subject to the general law to determine whether and how the assets and resources owned will be used, and the liability in certain circumstances to answer for the consequences of that use.
If this is to labour the obvious, it is because the formulation quoted above serves to anticipate the conclusion that a statute should attach to non-owners the same rights and liabilities.
It looks towards a statutory requirement that representatives of trade unions should be appointed, in that capacity, to the directing boards of companies.
And that is a nonsense.
Either there is ownership and the rights and obligations that go with it, or there is not and neither are there nor can there be those rights and obligations.
Nor does the fact that, so long as they consider that the affairs of the business they own are being conducted well enough on their behalf, owners do not choose to exercise their ultimate authority, provide any reason for supposing either that companies would be better managed if trade unions were implicated in management or that owners would acquiesce in the assumption, in whole or in part, of their rights by any other party — let alone by one whose essential interests are often opposed to their own.
In a free society, if trade unions want the rights of ownership, they cannot expect to get them as a free gift and call it industrial democracy.
They will have to buy out the owners.
And with the rights, they would get the obligations, too.
The signatories to the majority Report of the Committee of Enquiry on Industrial Democracy are as misled and misleading in treating property as a negligible factor as Robert Owen was in ignoring it.
So great a change does not enter upon the national economic scene unnoticed, like Owen's ‘thief in the night’ nor even conspicuously to the trumpetings of statutory provisions and the flourish of bureaucratic apparatus.
It does not enter because the entry assumes the willing compliance of people who consider that they have nothing to gain and much to lose by complying.
It takes two to tango; and if one of them will not, there is no dance.
But if there could be no pas de deux , perhaps there could be a ménage à trois .
There could be 2x + y, where x is the number both of the members appointed to a board of directors by the owners of the company, and of the trade union members; and y the number  of directors to be co-opted.
The majority report concluded that there should be equal representation of owners and trade unions; and then proceeds straight to the view that a third group of co-opted directors should be appointed, adding as their first reason that those directors would bring special experience to the board room, and a broader and more detached view of the company's affairs.
It then comes to the practical point, Citing German experience to show that ‘there was a tendency for employee and shareholder representatives to vote and act in distinct groups’, they add that the presence of co-opted directors on the board would mean that either group would at the very least need to gain the support of the majority of the directors before they could carry or veto a proposal.
This is almost to concede, if it does not in fact do so, that a board deriving its authority from two opposed sources cannot constitute a corporate body such as decision-taking requires.
The concession, near or complete, is denied in the statement ‘we do not see the co-opted directors primarily as a means of resolving deadlock’.
But put their function as arbiters where one will in the numbered sequence of reasons for their appointment, that is the most obvious and necessary purpose they would serve.
The denial does not so much refute prospective criticism as pay danegeld to it.
Like the Dane, the criticism does not go away.
Further, the majority report is silent on the question: to whom would the co-opted directors be accountable?
They were to owe their appointment to the trade union's and the owner's representatives on the board; and, if they could not agree, to the binding decision of an independent commission.
The case is quite unlike that which prevails at present when non-executive directors are appointed to a board.
As part of the board, they share in its collective accountability to the owners of the company.
In a 2x + y arrangement, there would be no such collective accountability, to a single ultimate authority, for the y directors to share in.
It seems, therefore, that they would be accountable to no one.
So, to summarise our findings on the proposals contained in the majority Report.
First, a presentation founded so largely on the view that equates the development of industrial democracy to the growth of the process of consultation by management of unions intent on retaining their traditional role which opposes them to management, does not provide a credible basis for the qualitative change, envisaged by the Report, in that role: a change to one of shared responsibility for management.
There can be no confidence  that unions, existing to serve a sectional interest, will or can suppress that interest in order to support the wider interest, whether at company or national level.
The majority's assumption or, as they put it, ‘persuasion’ that industrial democracy as conceived in the terms of reference will lead to increased industrial efficiency is, therefore, too insecure to form a basis for policy.
Next, even if it were secure in itself, it would not work.
It would not work because it assumes compliance by those who own the assets and resources, other than labour, of industry; and that assumption ignores that there inheres in ownership an inalienable right to determine whether, and if so how, to use those assets and resources.
If the trade unions want to exercise that right, they will have to get the legal title to them whether by purchase or by what has been called euphemistically, and in criticism of Robert Owen's failure to see the significance of ownership, ‘revolutionising practice’.
Compliance by owners would not be induced by administrative device, such as the formula 2x + y, the practical need for which amounts — despite the majority Report's disclaimer — to an admission of the validity of the criticism of the intention that responsibility for management should be shared by trade unions.
And, it would not work because the arrangement 2x + y does not provide a means of bringing accountability to bear on the performance of management: for it is highly improbable that a group of people which is primarily a derivative from two opposed and  irreconcilable interests can effectively be called to account by either; and the addition of a third group accountable to no one further confounds the confusion.
Finally, it is therefore the more difficult to see how the proposals can have anything to do with genuine industrial democracy, that is to say, with the accountability of the board of directors as a corporate whole to the individual men and women who constitute the workforce and who would have the ultimate power to replace an unsatisfactory board.
There must, too, be the gravest doubts about a system which excludes those who prefer not to join a union.
It is not self-evident that membership of a trade union should be a condition of participation in industrial democracy; nor enough for the majority Report to assert, simply as a statement of belief, that ‘if employees wish to be represented on the board, they must be prepared to organise’— that is, to join trade unions —‘to make representation on the board effective’.
For the essential characteristic of democracy is its insistence that all men are equal in esteem.
Emphatically, it is  not this: that all men are equal in esteem — but those who are members of the union are more equal than the others.
The fact that such a proposition could be presented a industrial democracy exposes the reality: that the exercise was about the extension of the powers of unreformed trade unionism.
This is not to say that those who signed the majority Report were disingenuous.
The  disingenuity was in the misconceived terms of reference.
Well,la politique a ses raisons que  la  raison ne connait point .
The greater pity is this: that because the terms of reference misidentified industrial democracy, the chance of getting a better perception of it, of its value and of the possibility of advancing it, was missed.
Because that misidentification insisted on making trade unions the vehicle for it but insisted also on the continuance of their traditional role, the outcome was bound to be primarily about an extension of their power in the performance of that role, the role that implicates trade unionism as the reciprocal to the ownership of the means of production and provision within the total system, Capitalism, as it evolved in Victorian Britain.
It was this role that the new model unions had consciously adopted in the eighteen fifties and that the Webbs had emphasised in the eighteen nineties.
A ‘radical change’ within that total system and in the name of industrial democracy, to the advantage of the trade unions, could only be secured by attributing to them rights inhering in ownership.
But attribution could only be meaningful if trade union representatives on company boards everywhere and always accepted wholeheartedly the duties of ownership along with the rights, so changing the role of the unions fundamentally and abandoning any pretence to industrial democracy.
Or, and this is the near-certain probability, constrained by their accountability to the membership, the trade union representatives would not accept the duties of ownership along with the rights, could not ‘change sides’.
The new-style boards could not have worked as they were meant to; and the misplaced expectation that they would have established industrial democracy would have collapsed.
The proposals contained in the majority Report of the Committee of Enquiry are not a credible alternative to the promotion of industrial democracy through the extension of an industrial co-operative sector of the economy.
They are not about industrial democracy at all.
By contrast, industrial co-operatives are wholly about industrial democracy.
A different set of questions would have avoided the false start  on the wrong track.
They would have been something like these:
Given that industrial democracy, defined as the ultimate right and duty of the men and women working in an industrial enterprise to call management to account for its performance, and, if that performance does not satisfy them, to replace management, is desirable in principle and as a means of making the efficient conduct of the enterprise their natural concern; recognising that the rights of use attaching to ownership, whether in the private or public sector, are inalienable; recognising the value in general of competition as a means of keeping production and provision sensitive to public needs and tastes, and as a means of relating the distribution of resources to them; to consider (i) in what sort of industrial organisation would industrial democracy be feasible;(ii) how far and in what circumstances would the adoption of such a form of organisation be feasible;(iii) by what means should its adoption be promoted and how long would it take to establish it as a characteristic feature in the industrial scene;(iv) what part should trade unions play in its promotion and adoption and what changes would that part require in their functions as they are commonly understood; and (v) where in the case of a particular industry, or organisation, the general interest requires that accountability should be to the public at large, considered for example as consumers or users of goods produced or beneficiaries from services provided, what compensatory measures should be introduced so as to make good as far as possible the permanent denial to employees of a right which is in principle generally desirable?
Such a formulation would require those asking the questions to confront the real problems: the need to understand that the aspiration to the exercise of democratic right and the discharge of democratic responsibility must arise from those who would exercise the right and discharge the responsibility and is not to be thrust upon those who do not want it or induced in those who are indifferent to it; the need for a form of organisation such that the interests of ownership and labour would be congruent; and the need to recognise that since accountability, above all, is the test of  authentic democracy, then by that same test there will be some circumstances in which the general case for industrial democracy is over-ridden.
It would recognise, too, that industrial democracy cannot be conjured into being overnight, no more than was political democracy, no more than was the joint stock company as the common expression of industrial capitalism.
It may be an exaggeration — though not by much — to observe that industrial democracy stands now where political democracy did before the Great Reform Bill of 1832.
This is not to say that we need take so unconscionable a time to establish industrial democracy, but only that it would be naive to suppose that there will be no doubts and difficulties — and that it would be a great mistake to let them deter us from starting from present worse to go to prospective better.
THE AWKWARD CORNER
If, like honesty, morality is best policy, it will pay us to do the right thing.
So far, the case discussed in this book for the extended use of the industrial co-operative as a form of organisation for production or provision has stood primarily upon the proposition that it is an expression of authentic industrial democracy, that such an extension would help to fill a debilitating gap in the practice in the United Kingdom of western liberal principles, to mend what Bertrand Russell calls ‘this disruption of democracy from within'.
The discussion has been a moral one.
Now it becomes a practical one.
It addresses the question whether it would in fact pay us to do the right thing.
The proposition that industrial co-operatives can create and distribute wealth at least as well and probably better than the traditional forms of industry had already been argued from cause to probable effect.
In empirical support of that argument we can now cite the case of the much studied and often reported-upon  Mondragon group of co-operative enterprises; much studied and often reported upon because, as Bradley and Gelb observe, ‘It represents the largest, possibly the most successful example of a manufacturing co-operative group’.
Here it is enough to recall that Mondragon, an industrial town of about 40,000 people in the Basque region of north-west Spain, has since 1956 become the centre of a growing group of highly successful industrial co-operatives with supporting banking, advisory and social services.
In 1980, the group employed some 20,000 people, of whom nearly 16,000 worked in a total of 76 industrial enterprises variously engaged in the following kinds of production: foundry and forge 7; capital goods 22; components 27; consumer durables 15; building 5.
Of the 76 co-operatives, 10 employed over 400; 11 from 200 to 400; 11 from 100 to 200; 23 from 50 to 100; and 21 under 50.
At constant (1976) prices, the sales of all the industrial co-operatives rose from 5,200 million pesetas in 1965 to 28,750  million pesetas in 1979; and their share of the domestic market rose from less than 1 per cent in 1960 to 10.6 per cent in 1976.
There is, of course, the immediate possibility that an ethnic factor, ‘Basqueness’, identifies the group with Basque aspirations and so provides a dynamic rarely if at all available elsewhere; and that this factor makes Mondragon a special case and not of any general relevance.
Bradley and Gelb find against that possibility: Not, then, a special case; successful not because it is Basque, but essentially because it is co-operative.
Those for whom one Basque swallow cannot make a British summer may be more impressed by the record of the plywood factories owned and operated by their employees and located on the west coast of the USA.
L. Stettner quotes Sachs: She quotes also from other studies to show that these co-operatives are better able to survive under adversity than are conventionally organised plywood manufacturing firms, and why: in a phrase, higher productivity, so much higher as to result in some cases in value added per labour-hour of more than twice that of those firms.
And there is this also to say.
Here we have operating in the same geographical area, in the same economic environment and manufacturing the same product, on the one hand enterprises organised as industrial co-operatives and on the other as conventional firms.
So comparing alternatives which are alike save in the form of organisation, we see that the theoretical expectation that superior motivation, the plus-factor available to the co-operative form, should enable it to out-produce the conventional form is borne out in practice.
It ought to.
It does.
And more: in both of the cases cited, the success of the co-operative form has been secured in a market economy.
For further empirical proof of the theoretical pudding, let us look first at the French, and then at the Italian achievements.
At the beginning of the decade, there were affiliated to the French Confederation of Producer Co-operatives (SCOP) some 670 active industrial co-operatives, organised in eleven regions each with a full-time staff of organisers and advisers, and having a combined turnover of £500 million.
The Italian example is evidence not only of the effective and widespread use in a western democracy -of the industrial co-operative model but also of the rigorously businesslike and wholly unromantic attitude of LEGA towards it.
Controlled by the Socialists and Communists, the Lega Nazionale della Co-operative e Mutue (the National League of Co-operatives and Mutual Benefit Societies) is not the only national organisation on the Italian industrial co-operative scene.
There is also the rival Confederation of Co-operatives, dominated by the Christian Democrats and  serving primarily rural and artisanal interests.
But of LEGA, the Financial Times reported in 1979 that ‘the 12,000-odd co-operatives operating under [its]umbrella generated sales of over L.5000 billion (£2.9 billion)’.
The article went on to record a growth rate of 20 per cent per annum in real terms; annual exports to the value of $1 billion; and a three-year investment programme of £800 million.
And more: ‘LEGA…represents en bloc the fourth or fifth grouping in Italy, behind IRL, ENI and Fiat, but more or less on a par with Montedison.’
Indisputably, the industrial co-operative sector is a major economic factor in Italy.
Next, and perhaps more significantly, the article recounts the historical perspective in which LEGA's leaders see its development:
For the Socialists…it is the key to a new economic model, based on the principle of self-management.
While firmly governed by the discipline of the market place, this would offer its own third way between the glaring inefficiencies of state capitalism, Italian style, and the short-comings of classic private enterprise where the interests of employees can be so easily trampled upon.
LEGA emphasised the need for an objective appraisal of a prospective co-operative's commercial prospects: and was critical of the attempt made on Mr Anthony Wedgwood Benn's insistence when he was Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, to rescue the Scottish Daily News , Kirkby Manufacturing and Engineering Ltd (KME), and Meriden; and to make the co-operative form the instrument of rescue.
‘Politely but comprehensively’, recorded the Financial Times , Signor Ornelli Prandini, the Communist President of LEGA dismissed the British way of doing things: ‘I  don't agree at all.
It's as if everyone else had given up and the Government then said, ‘Oh, give the workers some money and let them have a go.’
‘He draws some encouragement from the fact that the British are at least thinking about industrial, as opposed to consumer, co-operatives.
‘But they can't just be an end resort, when the venture has no chance anyway.
‘Not for the first time’, the article concluded, ‘Italian communism appears economically much harder-headed than British Socialism.’
On the matter of the notorious and failed rescue attempts certainly so; and the events of the day, 28 March 1979, on which the article appeared add point to the conclusion, That day, the Labour Government led by Mr James Callaghan was defeated by  one vote.
And if there was any one reason which, more than any other, ensured his defeat at the ensuing general election, then surely it was the inability of the trade union movement to assume during what had therefore become the winter of discontent, the responsibility required of them as a justification of the power and influence they claimed.
The contrast between British Socialism, as then exemplified by trade unionism, and LEGA, could hardly be sharper; the first, insistent on its traditional and conservative role, the role dispensed for it in the Victorian era by evolving Capitalism — to purvey labour to employing capital; the second, looking towards a synthesis to accommodate and resolve the opposed interests contained in that dispensation, looking towards ‘the third way’.
Nor, if we are willing to see our co-operative selves as other co-operators see us, should we fail to note Signor Prandini's implied criticism, pointed though polite, of the British concept of Co-operation as restricted almost exclusively to the Consumers' Movement.
A restriction which, whatever the success of the industrial co-operative elsewhere, many in Britain would have judged to be wholly desirable; for the recent British view had been distorted by what it saw as the examples of the Scottish Daily News , KME, and Meriden.
In its Report, presented in 1977 to Parliament, the working party set up by the Labour Government to develop further the idea of a Co-operative Development Agency, and broadly representative of the whole of the Co-operative Movement, declared of the three attempted rescues:
The so-called worker co-operatives have, of course, also been the focus of public attention.
A main reason for their conversion from companies in the conventional form has been the maintenance of employment.
But there is some danger where co-operatives are created out of economic adversity, for the situation is then one of commercial crisis and, important though the rescue may be on general grounds, it is far from an ideal basis on which to promote the reputation of co-operatives generally, or of Co-operation as an alternative form of organisation.
It is attempting to use Co-operation to turn failure into success but against heavy odds.
In the first of its annual reports the Co-operative Development Agency (CDA) returned to the theme.
Observing that the public interest had fixed almost entirely on the co-operatives set up to  rescue failed enterprises organised as companies in the conventional form, the Agency commented first that it was questionable how far those enterprises when reorganised, satisfied co-operative principles; and next that the recent closure of KME might have revived doubts about the effectiveness for industrial ventures of the co-operative form.
To remove those doubts and declare its own policy on proposed rescues, the Agency distinguished two possible objectives: the restoration of the failed undertaking to viability, or the preservation of a number of particular jobs.
Yet a loss of jobs was often the pre-condition of restored viability.
Where that was so and the workforce was invited, or itself proposed, to set up an industrial co-operative, but understood the preservation of every job to be the prime objective, the necessary conditions for effective management were absent from the start.
So, the first question the CDA would always have to put was: which of the two objectives did those advocating rescue want?
Almost certainly, they could not have both.
Because its prime concern had to be the restoration of viability, then where that implied a loss of jobs, the Agency would only recommend rescue if the workforce understood and accepted the implication, would arrange for the selection of those who were to become members of the co-operative and, by exclusion, decide who would lose their jobs.
A more general consideration followed.
If there were not sufficient expectation that a failed, conventionally organised enterprise could be restored to viability as an industrial co-operative, the injection of resources into it would divert them from more promising projects.
Lasting employment would not be created by re-inforcing defeat, but as a result of the creation of viable industrial co-operatives.
For completeness, the Report appended under the heading ‘Project Appraisal’ a questionnaire listing the considerations that any appraisal, whether of a proposed rescue, or conversion of an existing organisation to the co-operative form, or an entirely new start, would have to weigh.
The questions provide the framework for a close commercial assessment.
No one reading them could conclude that the Agency would allow anyone to suppose industrial co-operatives were in any way exempt from commercial discipline.
The declaration of policy was more than a statement of priorities and objectives, designed to disavow as misdirected Mr Benn's essay in Industrial Co-operation and to restore credibility to the idea — and, incidentally, to meet Signor Prandini's dismissive criticism.
It was also an  implicit protest at what many in Co-operation had seen  as an exercise which at best fundamentally misconceived the Movement's nature and aspirations, at worst misused them for the purposes of a political performance.
However the episode is judged, one thing is clear beyond any doubt: the damaging examples of the Scottish Daily News , KME and Meriden brought the idea of the Industrial Co-operative into disrepute.
That the burden of scepticism imposed by those apparent examples continued to impede the Agency's promotional work shows through successive annual reports to Parliament.
Thus, in the Report for the year 1980–81, the CDA commented that the industrial co-operative was still often regarded as characterised by them.
A recent study of them makes melancholy if instructive reading.
It fully bears out both the disquiet expressed in the working party's Report, and quoted above; and the CDA's dissociation of its policies from those in pursuit of which the three cases in question were projected into disaster.
Of the Scottish Daily News , the study finds that it was inadequately financed from the outset; was poorly equipped; so applied the principle of workers' control as to make ‘executive decision taking impossible if not farcical’; and produced an unacceptable product.
‘It is difficult’, the study concludes, ‘to see how such an ill-conceived, ill-equipped, under-funded project could ever have been successful,’ Of KME, it recalls that, in the face of advice that a proposal which made job-preservation the paramount consideration was likely to fail, Mr Benn decided to advance £3.9 million by way of assistance provided under Section 7 of the 1972 Industry Act.
Further, KME failed to act on the advice it was given by consultants and academics.
Commercially, the consequences were tragic.
And it never became an authentic co-operative.
‘KME differed little from conventional organisations and fell well short of co-operative ideals’; and again, ‘the worker directors apparently adopted an autocratic style and barely communicated with their fellow members.’
The study's findings on Meriden are kinder.
Few enterprises, it says, could have been faced with such a daunting task.
It had to overcome a fundamental lack of capital.
It had to succeed in selling, against Japanese competition, the product left to it by a conventionally organised British motor cycle industry which had already admitted defeat; and sales were not keeping pace with production.
Yet, productivity rose by 50 per cent over the levels previously achieved.
Certainly, Meriden was much more nearly an authentic industrial co-operative than were the other two; and, as certainly, realised the potential in morale, in practical  commitment to the objectives of the enterprise, which is the special feature of a co-operative.
There are lessons to be learned from the tale of the three attempted rescues.
They may be regarded as having been, at central government level, ideologically inspired: that is, undertaken either on the view that the possibility of rescuing a failed, conventionally organised enterprise would serve to promote Socialism in a neo-Marxist version of it absolutely opposed to Capitalism, and that the occasion was one which must not be missed even though the odds against success were heavy; or in a spirit of uncritical idealism, sure that the ideology guaranteed success, that the gloomy appraisal was therefore wrong and the distinction between co-operative means and socialist ends a carping irrelevance.
Alternatively, the attempted rescues may be supposed to have owed nothing to ideology, but as having been purely a misjudged essay in job-preservation.
And finally, and the most likely, that a mixture and muddle of all these considerations — political opportunism or opportunity, naive expectation, and well-meant but ill-judged intention — entered in central government's motive.
However that may have been, there is no doubting that at plant level and in two cases (the Scottish Daily News and KME) an ideological perception of workers' control precluded the effective delegation of executive authority to management.
If there had been any chance ever of the rescues' succeeding, that perception would have destroyed it.
As it was, it simply advanced the demise of two organisations already terminally ill.
And it fortified the widely held misapprehension that an industrial co-operative was of its nature unmanageable.
Presented as an essay in Co-operation, they were more nearly an experiment in anarchy.
So the lessons are these.
To the extent that the rescues were ideologically inspired and the businesses ideologically managed, then at best the ideology distracted attention from the true nature of the problems to be faced, and at worst served as an excuse for purporting to resolve them by decisions which were patently perverse.
It mistook excuses for reasons.
And secondly: no one, neither Minister at the head of a Department of State, nor local trade union leader of a workforce at imminent risk of unemployment, nor anyone else, should for purposes which are essentially ideological invite or encourage men and women to invest their hopes and expectations in projects only incidentally and doubtfully concerned to realise them.
And neither should they  for those purposes make play with the values and ideals of Co-operation.
For that would indeed be to misuse the men and women, the values and ideals.
If however the attempted rescues were purely an ill-judged attempt to preserve employment, we need only resolve not to make the same mistake again.
A donkey does not kick the same stone twice.
And if the motive mixed ideology and good intentions, then we may draw both conclusions: that the first perverted decision making and the second, as always, was not good enough.
And we may refer again to the CDA's first Annual Report.
It concludes the statement of its policy on rescue cases with this observation: that industrial co-operatives need no less organisational care, managerial competence and commercial realism than do conventionally organised enterprises.
Fortunately, there is much more to the recent story of the industrial co-operative sector in the United Kingdom than the depressing account of the Scottish Daily News , KME and Meriden.
It is not a story of spectacular political initiatives, nor one of unvarying success; and for those who mistrust simplistic answers to complex problems, perhaps therefore the more persuasive.
But it is a story of accelerating growth and solid achievement.
In its Annual Report for the year ended 31 March 1985, the CDA recorded that whereas, in August 1980, 305 industrial co-operatives had been identified, the number was now about 1,200.
The death rate among small industrial co-operatives was still significantly lower than among small businesses generally.
Among the 911 co-operatives active in June 1984, 128 engaged in manufacture, 562 in the provision of services, and 221 in wholesale and retail trading.
By themselves, these facts do not stand as a complete answer to the challenge: if the industrial co-operative form of organisation is more efficient than the conventional form, why is it that the first has not displaced the second but has remained until recently a negligible feature of the economy and, even now, can hardly be said to have become so far of more than marginal importance?
That is, in effect, to argue that the market, left alone, has determined that the application of resources to the creation of wealth is better undertaken by the conventional form.
But, as the CDA has argued, the satisfactory operation of the market requires a sufficient general knowledge of the choices available to the buyer.
People cannot be expected to buy the co-operative alternative if they do not know of it, or if they misunderstand it.
The Agency continued:
That knowledge is not available.
For, though there has been useful progress in bringing Co-operation to attention as a credible option, it remains in the United Kingdom, far more than in some western democracies, an exceptional way of undertaking an industrial venture.
It has to succeed, not in fair competition, but in the face of ignorance and misunderstanding: ignorance, because whereas professional knowledge and informed advice on the incorporation and conduct of conventionally organised companies are generally available, whereas education and training relating to them are commonplace, this is not true for co-operatives; misunderstanding, because the industrial co-operative sector is still often regarded as characterised by the three well-known rescue cases…and hence as supposing itself to be exempted from test by commercial criteria and the rigours of the market economy.
In short, as an industrial form, Co-operation has to make progress in the face of a massive inertia, against the virtually automatic commitment to doing things the known way.
That was written in mid-1981.
Since then, the burden of scepticism imposed by the three cases had lightened; and there has been more progress.
There are some 1,200 industrial co-operatives now.
There were about 400 then.
But it is still true that most members of the professions, accountancy, the law and banking, to whom people intending to start a business might turn for advice on how to constitute or finance it, will propose a company incorporated under the Companies Acts, or perhaps a partnership.
The idea of a co-operative will simply not occur.
Where it is suggested to professional advisers, the suggestion will commonly be met with the caution and dubiety they naturally bring to a proposal lying outside their experience or practice.
This is not at all to say that there is among the professions an animus against the industrial co-operative as incorporated body for doing business.
Rather, it is to emphasise that their members are in general uninformed about it; and that even where they are not uninformed, they are for the most part unversed in it.
For the great majority, the industrial co-operative is just not the done thing.
That is how inertia operates and will continue to operate until the industrial co-operative sector has acquired enough mass and momentum to overcome it.
And that is a large part of the  answer to the question why the industrial co-operative has not, despite its promise, been much more widely adopted here.
If, when it was in a position to do so, Consumers' Co-operation had reverted to the Pioneers' intention to develop independent and self-governing factories and workshops, the story would of course have been different.
But, as we have seen, regarding authentic Producers' Co-operation as ‘the rival doctrine’ the Consumers' Movement did little then to help, and so contributed to the inertia against which the industrial co-operative form has had to contend.
In short, the marked growth recorded by the CDA in the industrial co-operative sector has occurred in spite of the special impediment to which it is subject.
That recognised, its achievement is answer enough to the question why, given the attributes claimed for it, the place it has so far established for itself in the economy is still no more than marginal.
That much then for the state in recent years of the sector in the United Kingdom.
Properly discounting the three notorious rescue cases, we can cite its performance along with the Spanish, American, French and Italian examples as evidence to bear out the theoretical expectation that industrial co-operatives should perform at least as well as conventionally organised businesses; and that the extra that Co-operation has to offer as an ingredient necessary to full success, a potential in motivation, is indeed available to help industrial co-operatives out-perform conventional businesses.
The citation does however leave unexamined one further consideration; that there might within the range of manufacturing and service industries be some which, for whatever reason, whether of the nature or of the size of the business, make them unsuited to the industrial co-operative form of organisation.
We have already disqualified industries such as the natural monopolies comprised in the infrastructure of public services: the railways and the postal and telecommunications services are obvious examples.
The disqualification stands on the proposition that, where there is no market so that the user cannot by taking his custom elsewhere, discipline the provider, it is wrong to adopt any form which creates a right and duty to use the monopoly so as to satisfy the interests of an exclusive group of owners, as against those of the users.
And there would be no more reason for establishing the membership of a co-operative than the investors in a joint stock company as such a group.
But besides that wholly justifiable disqualification, two others are sometimes advanced: first, that the form is only suitable  for small businesses; and secondly, that it is not suitable for capital intensive businesses.
What is large, what is small?
With the reservation, following Bolton, ‘that a small firm could not be adequately defined in terms of employment or assets, turnover or any other arbitrary single quantity, nor would the same definition be appropriate through the economy’, we can adopt with him an upper limit of 200 employees for small manufacturing firms; and note that, in 1963, when he adopted that limit, the average number of people employed in such a firm was 25.
Now, the specific objection that, as a manifestation of democracy, large industrial co-operatives are impracticable has already been found fallacious because, mistakenly, it assumes direct democracy and overlooks delegation of authority to accountable management as a normal characteristic of indirect democracy.
We are left with the unspecific practical objection, the objection that is as much to say that only seeing is believing.
And it is answered by the fact that there are some pretty big ones to be seen: in the Mondragon group which, considered as a conglomerate, employs some 20,000, and within which each of 10 co-operatives employs over 400; and in the United Kingdom, where Scott Bader employs some 400.
Those who, in face of those facts still insist that the industrial co-operative is suitable only for small businesses, contribute to the inertia with which its promotion must contend.
They would however presumably agree that since the great majority of manufacturing firms are small businesses and employ only a small number of people, there would still be scope in manufacture for a considerable extension of the industrial co-operative sector.
They might also accept that some, if only few, among the many would grow; and that when it had become operationally necessary or desirable a growing business could divide itself and in such a way that the divisions were suitable ‘constituencies’ for the democratic purposes of the co-operative.
There is nothing here that organisational care and experience, some no doubt hard-won, could not attend to.
In short, we may conclude that there is no need to suppose that industrial co-operatives in particular cannot become large, or even very large, and remain successful businesses and authentic co-operatives but that the need to accommodate within them satisfactory constituencies may well affect their structure.
I make no attempt to define satisfactory; for apart from the truism that it must not be so large that the individual member of it is lost in the crowd and  hence in his own view and in that of those who lead, instruct or represent him, reduced to an impersonal average, what makes a satisfactory  constituency will vary from case to case.
There remains the proposition that the industrial co-operative is particularly unsuited to capital intensive business.
It is, of course, easier to start a new business, whether co-operative or conventional in organisation, which does not demand the investment at the outset of large sums but can build up its capital assets from a modest beginning.
However, the recent study by PA Management Consultants Ltd found that in themselves the analyses of the cases examined had not produced hard evidence to support the hypothesis that co-operatives would find it very difficult to compete in capital-intensive production:
Although it is tempting to hold up Meriden as a co-operative which was at a substantial disadvantage compared with its Japanese competitors, it is difficult to argue that its inability to finance capital-intensive production methods were solely responsible for its problems….
It must certainly be true, however, that any Company competing in product markets requiring significant technological inputs to product development needs to be able to set aside funds for this purpose.
Meriden was not able to do this.
Not, though, because it was, or was meant to be, a co-operative.
One further point of possible confusion: because venture capital from investors looking for capital gains is not available to co-operatives, they are likely to find it more difficult to raise the larger sums of money needed to start capital-intensive projects.
Here again, though, this is not by itself to say that where a co-operative can get properly started in a capital intensive business, it would find it more difficult to compete than would a conventionally organised firm.
In summary, the proposition is unsubstantiated.
A co-operative may have more difficulty in raising a large initial sum of venture capital and hence be at a greater risk of starting with too big a burden of interest on loan capital; but, having got started on a sound financial footing, it would be under no special difficulty in doing as well as ordinary firms.
So, to the conclusion drawn from European, American and British examples that the industrial co-operative is demonstrably a fully effective form of organisation, we can add that it is not necessarily subject to any special limitations of size or kind.
It remains for us to consider the macro-economic case for the widespread and general adoption of the industrial co-operative form.
In short, it is that it offers a way of by-passing ‘the awkward corner’, Nearly twenty years ago Professor Joan Robinson observed that the predictable consequences of the attainment of near-full employment must, if institutions and attitudes did not accommodate themselves to the new circumstances, be so far to strengthen the power of the trade unions as to prompt a vicious spiral of wages and prices; and that it would become chronic.
This was the awkward corner that the British economy was seen, by the mid-1960s, to have reached.
Predictable though it was, it had taken ‘about fifteen years of experience for the point to really strike home’.
But not, even after another fifteen years or so, culminating in the winter of discontent and in the fall of Mr Callaghan's administration, experience enough to induce institutions and attitudes to accommodate themselves.
The leopard did not change its spots, its instincts or its appetites.
As we have seen, the trade union movement either could not or would not show the forbearance required, in the national interest, of a great and powerful institution; nor, for that matter that sense of enlightened self-interest which would have told it that the morality of forbearance was its own best policy.
And that at a time when, as was realised, the stakes were particularly high, when the country's prospective self-sufficiency in oil would provide an incoming Government with a stronger economic base.
Read what the movement's spokesman had to say at the time.
In early January 1979, a leading article in the Financial Times observed:
The undignified tussle over wages has been sourly described by one trade union leader as ‘a return to the philosophy of the pig trough.’
Present troubles are not so much an outbreak of anarchy, as a return to normality, with all its faults…
Groups who have normally felt able to assert a strong bargaining position did voluntarily restrain themselves for three years of evident national emergency.
The decline in inflation and the recovery of real incomes was read, quite naturally, as a sign that the emergency was over and that they could safely assert their ‘rights’.
Just so.
Mr Scargill urged the miners to prepare for battle: they must stand firm over their wage claim.
Writing in the Yorkshire Miner he declared: ‘The day of the exploited miner must come to an  end now.
Our living standards are not going to be eroded any further.’
Mr Moss Evans's union, the Transport and General Workers, had called the lorry drivers out on the strike that a reading of contemporary newspapers suggests was the event, seen as characteristic of the abuse by trade unions of their power, that most vividly exposed the vacuity at the heart of policy and so most damaged the Labour Government's prestige and prospects.
The union settled, in the face of the Government's public criticisms, for a fifteen per cent pay rise.
Remember: the Government had set for the growth of earnings a guideline of five per cent; and looked towards a long-term approach in which collective bargaining would be based each year on a broad agreement between Government, union and employers about the maximum level of earnings which would be compatible with keeping inflation under control in the following twelve months.
How sweetly reasonable; and, given the trade unions' function as an implicated part of Capitalism, how impossible.
What the country got instead was the return to normality with all its faults; and a general election.
A general election is the occasion for the pronouncement of great expectations.
Mr Evans did more than expect.
He demanded.
As reported in the Financial Times , he said that the trade union movement would be demanding and, he hoped, achieving the implementation of the proposals for industrial democracy; and that the next decade would offer the unions a better chance than any other to bring in the desired change.
Did, one wonders, did Mr Evans really believe that, having observed the movement's dismissive rejection of the Labour Government's plea for moderation in the general interest, the electorate would return the Labour Party, the vehicle for trade unions' political aspirations, to office?
Did he really believe that it would vote for the introduction of industrial democracy in the Bullock Report's dubious prescription for it?
Did the trade union movement really fail to grasp that the two pre-conditions were: first, that its sense of responsibility must be seen not to be limited to a commitment in the shorter term to contribute to recovery from immediate crisis, but to extend, at the expense of short-run advantage, to the longer term commitment, to the revival of British industry and to its successful competition in world markets; and secondly, that a Labour Government would have to preside over the management of the country's affairs?
Mr Evans seems to have recognised that the prospective decade of self-sufficiency in oil promised a unique  opportunity for such a revival and hence the conditions in which a sympathetic government could satisfy the movement's ambition.
But for the rest, either his judgment was wildly at fault or his declaration mere rhetoric.
For it is not as though the trade unions had gone unwarned.
In a television interview on 8 January 1979, Mrs Thatcher said that they had been ‘put above the law’.
True, this remark was later said to go beyond the consensus in her shadow Cabinet; and Mr Prior sought to moderate it.
So, a possible explanation of the unions' behaviour is that they judged a Labour victory uncertain, if not unlikely; that they preferred to make hay while the setting Labour sun still shone; and that they felt secure against whatever weather a Conservative dawn might bring.
But if that were the explanation, it would imply that the movement was only willing to act in the general interest when the Labour Party formed an assured Government, and having decided that its defeat was impending, abandoned any sense of responsibility save for the unions' immediate, sectional interests.
And that surely would be too unprincipled.
The better explanation remains that the policy pursued by the trade unions during the winter of discontent did indeed mark a return to normality.
It is not too pessimistic to see in these events and in the unfolding economic history since 1979 of the United Kingdom, a general corroboration of the prognosis contained in Mr Peter Jay's 1975 Wincott Memorial Lecture.
There was, he argued, a fundamental contradiction in the country's political economic system; that, unless that contradiction were corrected, the system would within the foreseeable future collapse; and that the collapse would be catastrophic.
In summary, his argument is this.
The essential elements of the political economic system are: first, that the Government is accountable to an electorate composed of all adult men and women and so liable, if the electorate judges unsatisfactory the account rendered, to be dismissed from office and replaced by another administration; and secondly, that wages are determined by free collective bargaining in the labour market.
Two conditions have to be sufficiently satisfied by a Government if its accounts of its performance is to satisfy the electorate.
It must so conduct affairs so as to secure full or near-full employment and that the rate of inflation will be stable and low enough to be tolerable.
If any Government fails to meet either of these conditions then it will be replaced by another expected to meet both.
And if no Government could do so, then the necessary  foundation to government by consent of the governed would crumble and, sooner or later, the country would have become unmanageable as an authentic democracy.
And that would imply either anarchy or autocracy.
Yet, as things stand, no Government can satisfy both conditions: near-full employment and a low, stable and hence tolerable rate of inflation.
No Government can do so because — and here the argument extends Professor Joan Robinson's — as monopolistic suppliers of labour trade unions will charge more for it than would be necessary to exhaust the supply, and supply less of it than would be supplied if there were perfect competition.
If, in response to the threat thus posed to full employment, the Government stimulates the economy, the effect will be to accelerate the rate of inflation.
The point here is not merely that full employment creates a scarcity of labour and so automatically puts up its price, not such that the unions negotiating with already willing and, indeed, anxious buyers would remain relatively passive as buyers bid against one another.
Rather, it is that the active exploitation by trade unions of their monopoly requires a higher rate of unemployment than any acceptable notion of full employment will admit; and hence, that attempts by the Government to create employment by stimulating the economy will not only be inflationary but will fail.
If repeated often enough, the stimulus will lead to uncontrollable inflation.
Then, both of the conditions on which authentic democracy depends, near-full employment and a stable currency, will have gone.
This presentation is schematic; and it will, of course, be possible to show this or that particular instance as a departure from the proposition advanced by Mr Jay.
But this is not to deny its validity in general.
The corner is awkward, much more awkward than was recognised when, in 1965, Professor Robinson coined the phrase.
It is not to be negotiated by the conclusion of social compacts or contracts between the Trade Union movement and the Government.
For reliance upon a voluntary undertaking to observe wage-restraint implies a recognition of the movement's right to resume the full exercise of its powers.
It implies that there will be a return to normality, to the philosophy of the pig-trough.
Nor is the corner to be negotiated by reductions in the privileges enjoyed by trade unions which leave largely untouched their function as monopolistic suppliers of labour.
The Bank of England's quarterly bulletin (19 December 1985) declared that, unless there were an unexpected and big change in attitudes, excessive growth of pay would prevent the United Kingdom from taking advantage of an improving world economic environment.
A leader in The Times commented:
We have heard something of this from the Bank before.
In fact, roughly once every three months.
However, previous warnings have been accompanied by the hope that good sense will prevail, and the level of pay settlements tumble.
This time, even with a forecast that the rate of inflation will halve to 3.5 per cent by the middle of next year (1986), the Bank cannot offer any hope that the growth in earnings will slow in response.
In other countries, the Bank notes ruefully, prices and wages tend to follow one another quite closely.
‘UK wage behaviour is out of line with other countries’, the Bank says, citing three years of average earnings growth of 7 per cent to 8 per cent a year, despite high and rising unemployment.
The blame attaches to both sides of industry.
The Bank admonishes the blimpish directors of British companies, 75 per cent of whom, in a recent survey, said that the pay settlements they had conceded were not too high.
So, twenty years after Professor Robinson's observation that institutions and attitudes would have to change, the Bank sees as necessary, but does not expect to get, a change of attitudes.
Seven years after Mrs Thatcher's warning to the unions and nearly seven years of government under her direction during which time the trade unions' privileges have been reduced, the growth of wages continues strongly at a time of very high unemployment.
It remains a prime cause of inflation.
Because a decline in the value of the pound against that of other currencies would aggravate the condition, the Government is constrained to try to maintain that value; and to do so by the inducement of very high rates of interest.
Overseas creditors, we might almost say, have never had it so good.
In short, wage inflation operates not only to divert resources from investment in the country's manufacturing capacity but also to make borrowing and exporting more and more difficult.
In face of all this, it is difficult to deny Mr Jay's proposition: that it is the active exploitation by the unions of their monopoly of the supply of labour which is at the heart of the country's chronic economic malaise.
By ‘blimpish’The Times presumably means that the directors it so describes show an obstinate and blinkered lack of concern for the national economic interest, and persist in pursuing what they judge to be the more immediate interests of the companies they direct.
Blimpish or not, they can hardly be expected to do otherwise.
In negotiating this or that pay increase, they must be supposed to be settling for the best terms they can get in all the circumstances of the negotiation.
That the Government, and the Bank considered as an instrument of the Government's policy, will blame them is to be expected.
For the alternative view can only be that the assumptions on which that policy is founded are unsound, if only in supposing that employers can and will deliver wage restraint.
They cannot and will not in 1986 any more than the unions could or would in 1979.
The essential mistake lies in supposing that there can be an accommodation of attitudes without an accommodation of institutions.
The attitude is inherent, the natural characteristic of institution accountable, if it is a joint stock company, to its shareholders; and, if it is a trade union, to its members.
Neither is accountable to the unemployed nor, in a free society, to the Government.
By the middle of the last century, trade unionism had already declared that ‘scarcity of labour was one of the fundamental principles’, that the way to make labour dearer was to restrict the supply of it.
All the more strange that the advocates of a return to Victorian values should chide trade unions for refusing to forgo or minimise pay rises in order to create more jobs or to contain inflation.
As an implicated part of Capitalism, the trade unions must be expected to play by Capitalism's rules; and government by admonition is, as always, ineffectual.
Yet, despite the critical debility of the national economy, it is no less difficult to deny Mr Jay's further proposition: that though it would almost certainly serve the general interest to prohibit trade unions, in a free society such a prohibition would be unthinkable.
He comments:
The perception of social advantage in general abstention from collective bargaining is too remote from the circumstances of the individual worker for him ever to support through the ballot box a general prohibition on trade unions, let alone to abstain privately from their immediate protection in a world where there is no reason to expect other workers to confer a reciprocal advantage on him by similar abstention.
So, the cure will not be found in tinkering with the present institutions.
The need is to change them; to find for the means of production and provision another structure such as will of its nature avoid the dilemma with which the present dispensation ultimately confronts the country: either unacceptably high and chronic unemployment or unacceptable and uncontrollable inflation, each so operating as eventually to destabilise society to the point where the purposes of liberal democracy can no longer be entertained, let alone fulfilled.
The macro-economic case for the widespread and general adoption of the industrial co-operative form is that it is just such another structure; that the structural change lies in making labour the employer of capital rather than, as at present capital the employer of labour; that such a change would fuse the interests of ownership and labour, interests which so long as they remain separate must also remain ultimately opposed; and that, because relations among co-operatives and between producers and providers on the one hand, and consumers and users on the other would be determined by the operation of a free competitive market, the workers in each co-operative will be exposed to its imperative discipline.
In a properly managed co-operative, the workers will know that their business cannot prosper and support excessive wage claims.
They will know, too, that the ultimate responsibility for the success or failure of the business is theirs.
That knowledge, extended through manufacturing and service industry would ensure generally that the wages suit was cut according to the profitability cloth; and would remove from the operation of the national economy the inflationary propensity of the trade unions' monopoly of the supply of labour and, with it, a main cause of the United Kingdom's industrial debility.
It is all too easy to blame the unions, to argue that they must know perfectly well that the effect of excessive wage settlements is inflationary but that they nevertheless still seek and get them.
But that is to miss the point that it is not the unions, business to manage the firms with which they negotiate the settlements, nor to manage the national economy.
That is not what unions, under the present dispensation, are about; and that is why, after three years of wage restraint under the compulsion of economic crisis, there was in 1979 what the Financial Times properly called a return to normality, with all its faults.
To those who remain unpersuaded, there is this to say: that, in response to that recent survey, three-quarters  of the directors questioned did after all consider that the pay settlements they had conceded were not too high.
Why then should the trade unions have settled for something less?
What the critics, of the trade unions and managements alike, are really saying is this: that they do not like normality with all its faults.
They would like normality, but without its faults.
And that they cannot have.
What they have not yet recognised is that, if that is normality, if those are the institutions the system requires and that their normal behaviour, then the system is wrong and another is needed, a new economic model which will mark an advance from the sterile confrontation between Capitalism and Socialism, thesis and antithesis, to the synthesis providing a long overdue advance in democratic practice and a means of treating the chronic and disabling debility of the national economy.
To conclude: we have found that the industrial co-operative, in a market economy, is a fully effective form of organisation for production or provision in the United Kingdom as in other liberal democracies; that there is no necessary reason to attach to it limitations of size or kind; and that the general adoption of the form would import into the national economy such a structural change as is urgently needed to resolve the problem, ominous and intractable, of securing near-full employment without inflation at other than an insignificant rate.
So, to the moral case for the general adoption of the form we may now add the practical imperative.
We need the third way, urgently.
Most certainly, it would pay us to do the right thing.