

INTRODUCTION
How have the lives of all of us changed since the 1970s?
It's an important question, because unless we remember the past, we'll forget how much we have achieved during the last years.
And when you don't know where you're coming from, it's more difficult to be clear about where you're going.
This Conservative Government is clear about both these things.
The purpose of this publication is to make it clear to a much wider audience.
We are proud of what we have been able to do.
It is vital that we should be able to illuminate the journey so far; and let the journey so far illuminate the future.
For our work is not yet finished.
The Rt.
Hon.
Christopher Patten, MP, Chairman of the Conservative Party.
The 1970s
Britain —‘The sick man of Europe’
Strike-bound Britain under Labour.
Economic FAILURE
Recalling the images and themes of the '70s — especially the late '70s — it is difficult fully to appreciate how bad things actually were.
Phrases such as‘sick man of Europe’; ‘Winter of Discontent’; ‘who rules Britain?’— these phrases are in many ways too well known.
They slip off the tongue too easily.
We cease to register the full meaning.
‘Who rules Britain?’
What a question!
Did people really mean it?
‘Sick man of Europe’.
That one hurts, too.
Is that how the world really saw us?
Was it correct?
Hard to believe though it may now be, Britain in the 1970s was experiencing a profound crisis.
At its heart were the twin problems of economic failure and social disintegration.
Britain was no longer paying its way in the world.
One of the most enduring memories is of the Labour Government having to go to the International Monetary Fund, ‘cap in hand’, to ask for a loan to prop up the UK's sagging economy.
But there was more to it than coming out with the begging bowl because of a particular crisis.
That was just a symptom.
More importantly, beneath the surface, the fundamentals of the British economy were all wrong.
Why?
Completely the wrong approach had been taken by the Government.
Instead of letting industry fight to become internationally competitive, the Labour Government preferred to protect it from reality.
Subsidise it; bail it out; or nationalise it, so that it was protected by the bottomless purse of the taxpayer.
This was not the way to encourage dynamism or efficiency.
It was a way to guarantee that slovenly practices and inefficiencies would become even more firmly entrenched.
They did.
Competitiveness slid away.
Instead of providing the British people with more incentives to work hard and succeed, the Labour Government preferred to increase taxes, so that it was hardly worth one's while to produce more wealth.
The top rate of taxation on investment income reached 98 per cent!
Instead of legislating to control damaging and unnecessary strike action, the Labour Government actually increased the powers and privileges of Trade Unions (in 1976).
Workplaces continued to get ever more choked up, not just by strikes, but by restrictions on who was allowed to do what, a refusal to adopt new technology, and so on.
Instead of controlling Government spending, and keeping the lid on inflation, the Labour Government borrowed more and more — increasing spending by over 12 per cent in just one year (1974–5), and presiding over an inflationary spiral the like of which has never been recorded before or since.
And the result of all this?
Britain indeed became the ‘sick man of Europe’.
Over the five years of Labour rule, Britain had the slowest economic growth of any major industrial nation.
By 1979, manufacturing output was in fact 2½ per cent lower than in 1974.
(Labour now claims to be the champion of ‘modern manufacturing strength’.)
Unemployment more than doubled.
And, of course, inflation ran out of control, reaching an unprecedented peak of 26.9 per cent in August 1975.
‘Inflation, apathy, pessimism, political corruption, erosion of individual freedom — these are just some of the present-day problems that add up to‘the English sickness’.
And although there has been a great deal of argument as to the cause, very few people would deny that Britain is in a state of decline.’
From the introductory note to the 1978 publication ‘What's wrong with Britain?’ edited by Patrick Hutber.
‘…the most haunting [international]problem of all; the decay of our most respected ally, in solvency and power — Great Britain.’
Eric Sevareid, US TV Commentator.
LABOUR'S BORROWING
Labour forecast £2.7 billion of Government borrowing (PSBR) for 1974–75.
The real figure turned out to be £8.0 billion.
By 1975–76 it had risen to £10.3 billion — two and a half times the level inherited from the Conservatives just two years earlier.
In today's money, £10.3 billion works out at a staggering £34.3 billion.
Labour's Chancellor of the Exchequer, Dennis Healey.
Social Disintegration
As disturbing as our economic decline was a sense of social disintegration.
Partly, this was the other side of the same coin as economic failure.
For example, the Winter of Discontent was not only destructive in an economic sense.
It also undermined much of our sense of community and common purpose.
And it offended the most basic of civilised standards of behaviour that British people were rightly used to.
The panel on page 16 conveys something of the scale of the troubles.
The country was being crippled — by its own people.
In the early weeks of 1979, ports were blockaded, the dead left unburied, rubbish piled high in the streets.
Hospitals were reduced to emergency cover, schools were closed, and much of industry was at a standstill.
The inconvenience — sometimes danger — to ordinary people was ignored.
The strong — those in powerful Unions — gained at the expense of the weak.
A leaflet distributed in transport cafés stated: ‘To Hell with being accused of starving kids and OAP's — somebody else will look after them’.
Such an explosion of factionalism and utter selfishness was shocking to all who lived through it, and seemed to threaten our whole way of life.
Violent picketing also threatened the rule of law.
The authority of Government sank to a level previously unknown in the UK, and the view began to gain hold that no one could govern Britain without the ‘permission’ of the ‘Union barons’, as they were called.
One opinion poll showed that people regarded the transport union leader as being more influential than the Prime Minister.
Frequently the view was heard: ‘we need firm leadership’.
But people were not quite sure whether firm leadership was any longer feasible in Britain.
Meanwhile abuse was not restricted to the picket lines.
Well-publicised abuses in the workplace became a national disgrace.
(Workers sat around playing cards because their daily quota had been met; whole teams stood idle because only the appointed mechanic was allowed to turn a particular screw; and so on.)
The corrective to all this — a culture that stressed hard work, honesty, respect for others and respect for oneself — was given short shrift.
Indeed, there was an anti -enterprise culture.
Profit was a dirty word.
Success was penalised by high taxation.
The ethos of the '70s would leave everybody in equally drab council estates; denied the chance that high quality schools used to offer; offered ‘permissiveness’ in place of standards and values; and left to quarrel over how to divide an ever- diminishing cake.
‘The country's broke’
Thus, it wasn't only the ‘economy’ that was going downhill.
The character of the nation had changed for the worse.
And social services suffered too, as they always will when wealth creation is despised.
In the five years of Labour Government, hospital waiting lists increased by nearly half.
During the same five year period, and following the disastrous Rent Act of 1974 over 400,000 private dwellings ceased to be available for rent.
Many landlords, it was clear, did not dare to let their properties any more.
The people of Britain were far from thriving.
Real income actually fell on average for the five years to September 1978.
But, perhaps most importantly, the nation seemed to have lost its pride and its sense of direction.
‘The country's broke’, said many an elector on the doorstep during the 1979 election.
Britain was in decline and something had to be done to reverse it.
‘Laws enacted by Parliament are not obeyed by the people.
Elected Governments find that they have to share their power with unelected bodies…
Events are seemingly beyond their control.
And the signs multiply of popular restlessness.’
Anthony King, introduction to ‘Why is Britain becoming harder to govern?’(1976)
‘It will not advantage the lower paid workers in a free collective bargaining situation if those who are the strongest get the most.’
Mr Callaghan (Labour Prime Minister) 6 February 1979
LABOUR'S WINTER of DISCONTENT
Unfortunately no excerpts could be taken from THE TIMES.
They were on strike!!
Powerless.
A darkened high street during the power cuts of Labour's last year ‘in power’.
‘We cannot go in year after year, tearing ourselves apart in increasingly bitter and calamitous industrial disputes.’
1979 Conservative Manifesto
TIMETABLE OF KEY EVENTS
NOVEMBER 1978
Strikes included one at Ford (which cost 117,000 vehicles), the bakery workers' strike (which involved violent picketing), strikes at British Leyland, Vauxhall, Rolls Royce, and the southern region of British Rail.
NOVEMBER 1978
Strike at Charing Cross Hospital, with pickets turning away oxygen cylinders.
A strike by provincial journalists and social workers in some areas was added to the list.
9 JANUARY 1979
Pickets at ports, bringing exports and imports to a standstill.
11 JANUARY 1979
Lorry drivers' strike in England and Wales made official.
State of Emergency declared in Northern Ireland due to tanker drivers' action.
12 JANUARY 1979
North Western Water Authority strike — supply to nearly 1,000,000 people at risk
16 JANUARY 1979
National rail strike
22 JANUARY 1979
24 hour ambulance strike.
Army ambulances prepare at Windsor to take over.
24 JANUARY 1979
65 cancer patients sent home from the Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, as a result of picketing.
29 JANUARY 1979
All-out strike by staff at two Harrogate hospitals began.
30 JANUARY 1979
Around half of the 2,300 NHS hospitals were now providing only emergency services.
22 JANUARY 1979
Local government workers went on strike, including dustmen, school caretakers, meals staff, crossing patrols, sewer-men, gravediggers, road-repairers, hospital domestic staff and porters, laundry and kitchen staff; and over 20 municipal airports were hit when ground staff went on strike.
London ambulancemen refused to answer emergencies.
Nearly half of all schools in England were closed.
31 JANUARY 1979
Due to continued strike by 65 Liverpool gravediggers, the city was storing 200 embalmed bodies in a disused factory.
6 FEBRUARY 1979
‘1,150 schools were closed mainly, but not entirely, as a result of industrial action by public service unions’.
Mrs Shirley Williams, Labour Education Secretary .
‘As of today, we do not believe that the declaration of a state of emergency would increase that flow of supplies, food, or materials.
Indeed, it might lessen the flow.’
Mr Callaghan (Labour Prime Minister) 16 January 1979
Frequently the view was heard: ‘we need firm leadership’.
But people were not quite sure whether firm leadership was any longer feasible in Britain.
Eastern Europe?
No.
A bread queue in Labour's Britain.
From the 1979 Conservative Manifesto
‘Britain — a great country which seems to have lost its way.’
‘What has happened to our country, to the values we used to share, to the success and prosperity we once took for granted?’
‘During the industrial strife of last winter, confidence, self-respect, common sense, and even our sense of common humanity were shaken.
At times this society seemed on the brink of disintegration.’
‘We cannot go on year after year, tearing ourselves apart in increasingly bitter and calamitous industrial disputes.’
‘Most people, in their hearts, know that Britain has to come to terms with reality.
They no longer have any time for politicians who try to gloss over the harsh facts of life.
Most people want to be told the truth, and to be given a clear lead towards the action needed for recovery.’
‘Our Party offers the nation nothing less than national revival, the deeply-needed, long-awaited and passionately longed-for recovery of our country’
Margaret Thatcher, 1978 Party Conference
In 1978, the Conservative Party Conference used ‘The Next Government’ as their Conference slogan — soon to be fulfilled.
‘Britain — a great country which seems to have lost its way.’
(1979 Conservative Manifesto)
1979
The flag at Wembley Stadium.
The 1980s
The new era.
Britain's road to recovery.
Celebrating the Conservative election night triumph.
TAKING DOWN THE BARRIERS
The 1980s, it is well known, produced a transformation in Britain's fortunes.
By the late '80s, no longer could we be described as the ‘sick man of Europe’.
On the contrary; Americans, Japanese and European commentators were talking about an extraordinary economic renaissance in the UK.
Our international reputation was riding high, and Conservative policies on privatisation, choice and competition were — and are — being copied in many parts of the world.
Even, on occasions, by the British Labour Party.
How was the transformation accomplished?
How did the new Conservative Government, entering office on 4 May 1979, manage to turn headlong decline into unparalleled advance?
There were two broad strands to the Government's approach.
First: take down the barriers standing in the way of success.
Second: give people a reason for wanting to be successful.
Perhaps the biggest barrier to economic success was the power of the Unions.
After years of industry — and the country — being almost paralysed by strikes and restrictive practices, the country was crying out for a Government that would give a lead.
The Conservative Government, under Mrs Thatcher, set about the task straight away.
A series of five different Employment Acts since 1979 have succeeded in changing the whole way in which Trade Unions operate.
They now have to ballot their members before being able to call a strike.
Employees can't be forced to join a Union against their will.
Unions are no longer above the law if they are damaging tactics such as‘blacking’ or ‘secondary picketing’.
These policies bore real fruit.
And, by rooting out abuses, they actually helped the interests of ordinary Trade Unionists.
Industry was able to move forward, instead of being pulled in opposite directions at once.
In 1979, over 29 million working days were lost through industrial action, compared with less than one million last year — an extraordinary transformation.
Bad industrial relations was not the only barrier to success that needed to be dealt with.
Other problems included a forest of controls and paperwork for business.
Since 1979, no less than 27,000 different Government forms business was supposed to fill in have been scrapped.
Many unnecessary regulations on business have also been removed, leaving industry freer to compete.
The other key barrier was inflation — a millstone round the neck of British business.
The average inflation rate under the last Labour Government was 15.6 per cent.
Since 1979, the average rate under the Conservatives has more than halved, and is forecast to be four per cent by the end of this year.
‘The sick man of Europe is well again.’
(Lord Young, 8 October 1987)
‘None of us will survive if we continue to ignore the views of the average, the normal, the regular members.’
(September 1988 — Eric Hammond, General Secretary of the EETPU)
‘The mission of this Government is much more than the promotion of economic progress.
It is to renew the spirit and the solidarity of the nation…at the heart of a new mood in the nation must be a recovery of our self-confidence and our self-respect.’
1979 Margaret Thatcher
The Japanese back Britain
Japanese companies have had to choose where to invest in Europe.
In 1989, Japanese companies put 38 per cent of their European Community investment into Britain, leaving the rest to be shared between 11 other countries.
Recent projects have included the big Toyota plant in Derbyshire, the Honda plant in Swindon, Fujitsu in County Durham and Nissan in Tyne and Wear (which is now to export cars to Japan!).
At the same time, the Americans put 41 per cent of their European Community investment into Britain.
All in all, Britain has in recent years received six times as much investment from abroad as Germany, and three times as much as France — a major success story for the UK.
Andrew Clark of the Derby and Derbyshire Chamber of Commerce (which has been closely involved with the Toyota deal) said that the UK was attractive because of‘the corporate climate brought about by this Government.
There is…a freedom to do business without being hampered by industrial relations difficulties, restrictive practices, excessive red tape or other problems of the 1970s.’
(March 1990)
‘If there were Business Olympics, Britain would be winning quite a few gold medals.’
23 February 1988 — Mr Toshio Yamazaki, Japanese Ambassador)
Modern steel manufacturing at Scunthorpe.
Manufacturing engines at Nissan's new plant in Sunderland.
An  unprecedented growth in small business.
The Falklands Campaign
‘The spirit of the South Atlantic was the spirit of Britain at her best…
If there was any doubt about the determination of the British people it was removed by the men and women who…brought a renewed sense of pride and self-respect to our country…
If this is tomorrow's generation, Britain has little to fear in the years to come.’
Margaret Thatcher, speech to the 1982 Conservative Conference
Inside HMS Hermes as the task force steams to the South Atlantic
Celebrations as British servicemen return from the Falklands on the Canberra.
KEY facts
Strikes
In 1979, over 29 million working days were lost through industrial action, compared with less than one million last year.
Inflation
Down from 15.6 per cent average during the ‘74 –'79; Labour Government, to an average of 7.7 per cent under the Conservatives — and an estimated 4 per cent by the end of this year.
Income Tax
Down from 33p to 25p basic rate.
Top rate down from 83p to 40p.
Manufacturing Productivity
Up by over 50 per cent since 1979.
Manufacturing Exports
Up by 60 per cent since 1979.
Business Investment
Up by two thirds over the 1980s — faster than any other major industrial country except Japan.
Science Parks
There are now 39 science parks in Britain, with another 22 planned.
This compares with two in 1974 and still only two by 1979.
Shareholders
The number of shareholders has risen from 7 per cent to 24 per cent of the adult population.
Employment
The total number of people in employment is now 1 million more than in 1979.
Business Performance
27 of the 50 top-performing European businesses are British — according to a German study.
New Businesses
The number of new businesses has increased at the rate of almost 90 per day for every day since 1979.
‘It is already now clear that the 1980s will stand out as a decade of impressive improvement in economic performance, reversing a long-term trend of decline relative to other member countries.’
(Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris 17 August 1988)
‘The 1980s have been very refreshing.
We had been a nation that had gone downhill, but that has been reversed.’
(Sir Trevor Holdsworth, as CBI President January 1990)
THE INCENTIVE TO SUCCEED
It is not enough to remove barriers to success.
One also needs to give people a reason for wanting to be successful.
This was the second part of the Conservative strategy.
One key task was to reduce tax rates.
As we've already seen, the very high tax rates under the Labour Government helped to kill enterprise.
There was not much point in working harder or taking risks if the taxman picked up the main benefit of one's success.
Thus, in a number of stages during the 1980s, the Conservatives cut the basic rate of income tax by nearly a quarter (from 33p to 25p in the £) while the top rate was reduced by more than half.
Taxes on companies' profits are also now far less than they used to be (down by over a third).
These radical changes, designed to make work more rewarding, were not confined to the tax system.
Companies had to be exposed to the full rigour of the market — so they would feel the full impact of success and failure.
In other words, they could no longer be cushioned from reality, or protected from the need to compete and win.
This was a difficult medicine, but necessary.
As John Banham of the CBI has said:
‘This new era could perhaps best be labelled ‘the era of free market competition’.
Britain became probably the most open market in the world.
Business had no choice but to compete or disappear.
Many disappeared, but the overwhelming majority survived, and prospered.’
The need to compete (and no longer rely on the taxpayer or a government that just printed money) had a dramatic effect on industry.
State-owned British Leyland, for example, had (barely) managed to get by with each employee only making six cars in 1979.
Now each employee in the privatised Rover Group makes 20.
Similarly, in 1979–80, it used to take 13.2 hours for a man to produce a ton of steel.
Now each employee at British Steel needs only 4.8 hours to do the same job.
Over-manning of industry was dramatically reduced in a ‘shake-out’ in the early '80s and new technologies were successfully introduced.
As a result, by the end of the decade, output per person in manufacturing was half as much again as it had been at the start of the decade.
These measures took courage.
It also took courage to privatise vast tracts of nationalised industry — including British Steel, Rolls Royce, British Gas, British Telecom, British Airways and British Aerospace, the electricity and water industries, airports and other companies besides.
These industries are now having to compete in the private sector and are much healthier for it.
And so is Britain.
Overall, the effect of low taxes and a free market has been to make Britain far more enterprising.
We now have an ‘enterprise culture’, where people and companies are encouraged to succeed.
Beyond that, governments should step back, and let people do the succeeding.
The point has been to set people free from constraints; and leave them free to take advantage of the opportunities around them.
Governments only try to do too much when they trust the people too little.
‘Britain has returned to the lead in the global swing towards free economies and pro-growth policies based on individual initiative.’
(Wall Street Journal, after ‘88 Budget 16 March 1988)
Britain —‘the most dynamic country in Europe’
(influential French newspaper, Le Monde 9 May 1988)
British Steel, Rolls Royce, British Gas, British Telecom, British Airways and British Aerospace, the electricity and water industries, airports and other companies besides.
These industries are now having to compete in the private sector and are much healthier for it.
And so is Britain.
Privatisation: good for industry; good for investors.
THE SPIRIT OF INDEPENDENCE
In Britain, during the 1980s and beyond, trusting the people has paid off.
Growth has been driven forward by a free people using its talents.
A recent German study of the best-performing companies in Europe showed the fruits of this freedom.
Of the top 50 European companies,no fewer than 27 were British .
Meanwhile, the Conservative Government has helped ordinary people to gain a larger stake in the nation's wealth.
Since 1980, it has been the right of all council house tenants to buy their own home.
1,300,000 council houses have now been bought.
Similarly, the privatisation of nationalised industries has turned millions more citizens into shareholders.
There are now over 11 million shareholders, more than three times as many as in 1979.
Gradually, a new spirit of independence has been gaining hold.
Business is only sharper because the people that run it — and work within it — have a healthier attitude.
There is more initiative.
More responsibility.
Higher standards.
Greater self-discipline.
The new ethos of the '80s had had a positive effect on the character of the people, just as the ethos of the late ‘70s had a severely negative effect.
And greater success at wealth creation has also meant that we have been in a better position to provide practical help to those that need it.
‘Growth has been driven forward by a free people using its talents.’
The 1990s
The fruits of Conservative government
The Swansea Marina — before and after.
BUILDING SUCCESS
The Milton Keynes Shopping Mall.
The Docklands Light Railway.
Constructing the Channel Tunnel.
‘In our party we know that it is not the State that builds the success of a Nation.
It is the citizen who builds the success of the State.
What we in Britain must do is encourage success at every level…
No one should settle for less than they can achieve’.
John Major speech to the Scottish Conservative Party Conference, 1991
‘The 1990s offer exciting prospects for British companies in Europe.
Companies are far better equipped to compete with their international rivals than they were ten years ago’.
Sir Ernest Harrison, Chairman of Racal Electronics and Racal Telecom (Jan 1990)
For all this progress, are the 1990s really better for ordinary people in a practical sense than the 1970s were?
The great area of progress since the 1970s has been to create a healthy and enterprising economy.
The late 1980s brought too fast a rate of expansion, causing inflation to rise again — and showing that there is no such thing as a final victory against inflation.
High interest rates were needed.
Now inflation is being squeezed hard, and the rate of inflation is falling fast — as is the level of interest rates.
The policy has worked.
But the most important thing to grasp is that, in spite of a period of recession, the economy has remained fundamentally healthy and enterprising.
High interest rates made people buy less, and therefore businesses sell less — even the most healthy and enterprising businesses.
Lower sales are not a sign of weakness of industry and commerce — just weakness of demand.
Now, with interest rates on the way down, business will be able to expand once more— from the strong base achieved in the 1980s.
The underlying position of the British economy remains very strong.
As John Major when Chancellor told the British Chambers of Commerce at the end of 1989, we were set for ‘a difficult year but a promising decade’.
So it has proved.
Now we are winning through.
But the strength of the economy is not an end in itself.
The value in all this is to better the lives of ordinary people.
Have we succeeded?
How, in terms of lifestyle and standards of living, does Britain in the 1990s compare with Britain in the 1970s?
The Mersey harbour front.
The Spread of PROSPERITY
Real net income for families on average earnings:— up by over a third in 12 years.
This represents a huge and genuine increase in prosperity — resources and buying-power — for British families and for the British people as a whole.
Prosperity is now spread more widely than ever before.
For example, more people now have key household goods and the benefit of home ownership — as the charts show.
Take an area like housing.
Most people would agree that their home is a vital part of their prosperity — or lack of it.
Indeed, in the 1970s, the insufficient quality and quantity of housing was a big political issue.
How have things changed?
Very substantially.
For example,many more people,(nearly seven out of ten) now own their own houses.
That's an increase of four million households compared to 1979.
The quality of housing is also improving all the time.
Far fewer houses for example lack basic amenities.
And many more houses now have central heating.
Of course there is yet more progress to be made.
But that should not stop us from recognising that things are very much better in the '90s than they were in the '70s.
And the progress is set to continue.
Or take household goods — such as washing machines, televisions, deep freezers, microwaves etc.
Again, see the panel for details.
What stands out is how prosperity of this kind has spread to so many more people.
For example, seven out of ten households now have a video recorder and nearly nine out of ten have a colour television.
Ownership of cars is also well up, and so is that of telephones.
It is particularly heartening to note that telephone ownership amongst pensioners has climbed from 49.8 per cent of households in 1979 to nearly 86 per cent ten years later.
Similar increases are recorded for pensioners having cars and central heating.
Prosperity, then, is spreading.
People own more, they travel more, they do more.
This is a fruit of the nation's economic success, bringing direct benefit to British households.
In the 1970s it used to be said that the British paid themselves more than they really earned.
Since then, pay has on average gone up 30 per cent in real terms — and now we really earn it, too.
The Resources To Do MORE
Greater prosperity — more wealth creation — has enabled Britain to devote greater resources to our public services.
Thus, we are better off not only in terms of the money people have to spend, but also in terms of the quality of our schools, hospitals, roads and other forms of public service that are an important part of our true standard of living.
The Conservative Government always said that we had to create wealth first, and then improve our public services.
This is how it has happened.
As our national wealth increased, we have been able to devote much greater resources to these services than ever before.
Here are some examples.
Education is now better resourced, with spending on each schoolchild having increased by a massive 42 per cent in the last 12 years.
Greater resources have brought clear benefits.
For example, there are now on average 30 microcomputers in every secondary school.
Meanwhile, the number of students having the advantage of higher education at universities or polytechnics has risen from 780,000 to 1,060,000.
We plan for even more in the future.
But this is real progress — and the clear result of creating real wealth.
The same is true of health.
In 1977, the Labour Health Secretary David Ennals said: ‘In the present economic climate the Government can do little more than provide for the increasing number of old people, leaving a small margin for improvements in method of treatment.’
He was right.
Then, a declining economy could not afford better healthcare.
But now it's different.
Now we are able to employ 16,000 more doctors and dentists than in the late '70s, and no less than 60,000 more nurses.
This means more and better treatment — more immunisation, for example, and more resources for anything from hip replacements to heart transplants.
Britain now has more successful kidney transplants than any other European country.
The Conservative Government has introduced a nationwide breast cancer screening service and also a computerised call and recall system for cervical cancer screening — the first country in the European Community to do so.
All told, life expectancy has increased by two years for women in Britain in the last decade, and by two and a half years for men.
Again, there is more than we would like to do, and more that in time we will do.
But for the moment it is right to take stock of how much has already been achieved — to the benefit of us all.
One could talk about many other areas of improvement: the huge 68 per cent increase in real spending (over and above inflation) by Government on community care services since 1979; the 29 per cent increase in real spending on the whole range of benefits for elderly people; or, in a completely different field, the improvements in public transport which have, for example, seen the number of rail passengers increase by 14 per cent .
Similar signs of progress and improvement are to be found across the board.
The result is a profound advance from the position of Britain in the '70s to that of Britain in the '90s — an advance that must be continued.
Safety
The chances of having an accident at work today are only half those in 1979.
The chances of being killed in a road accident have almost halved since 1979.
Britain now has the best road safety record in the European Community — helped by Conservative legislation, including making the wearing of seat belts compulsory.
Social Progress
Health spending is half as much again as it was in 1979, after taking account of inflation.
This has involved increasing the number of doctors and dentists by 16,000, and the number of nurses by 60,000, improving patient care.
Education spending on each schoolchild is up by 42% since 1979.
One in five young people receives higher education, compared with only one in eight under the last Labour Government.
Teachers' pay is up 30 per cent in real terms since 1979.
Spending on social security has increased by 41% over and above inflation — to well over £1 billion per week.
The average pensioner is 32% better off in real terms than the average pensioner in 1979.
Overall spending on disabled people has increased (in real terms) by a massive 152 per cent since 1979.
The caring services — better resources than ever before.
Life expectancy  has increased by two years for women in Britain in the last decade and by two and a half years for men.
THE REFORMS TO DO BETTER
But the Conservative record has been about more than increasing spending.
For, often, money is not enough.
It is also the way it is spent that matters, so that people get the maximum benefit and the system provides the best possible service.
This is why we have instituted imaginative reforms of education, of health, of the legal profession, of social security, and of other crucial areas of our national life — so that we don't just do more, but also do better.
A good example is education.
Now schools can ‘opt out’ from local authority control, so that the people who care most about children's futures — especially parents and teachers — are together empowered to make the key decisions.
Parents can also now say which school they'd like their children to go to.
As well as keeping the remaining grammar schools, the Conservative Government has also created seven City Technology Colleges, with more to follow.
These place the emphasis on science and technology.
And for all pupils, a ‘core curriculum’ has been introduced, ensuring that all children can have a thorough grounding in the most important subjects.
These are new reforms.
The benefits are already beginning to be felt.
The full benefits will come through during the next few years.
The Health Service is also being transformed for the benefit of patients.
‘Self governing hospitals’, for example, have much more freedom to provide the services they think are best for their locality.
Meanwhile, the new ‘internal market’ can help your GP to help you, by giving him or her the resources to buy the treatment you need.
Also, GPs have a new-style contract.
As The Guardian said, ‘the thrust of the contract is absolutely right.
It will create a family doctor service more accountable to its customers and more attuned to its patients’ needs.’
Progress on the Environment
Ozone-depleting CFCs are to be completely phased out by the year 2000.
40 per cent of motorists now use lead-free petrol, compared with 3 per cent in 1989.
£28 billion is being spent over the next ten years on cleaner water.
The area of Green Belt has been doubled since 1979, and now covers an area roughly the size of Wales.
A huge, 150 square mile, national forest is now in the process of being planted in the East Midlands.
We've come a long way — with everyday improvements such as…
The range of goods in the shops.
Food in the supermarkets, for example— we're now quite used to all sorts of delicacies that most British people had never heard of in the '70s.
The colour and style of our shopping centres, and the liveliness of British street fashion.
The range of restaurants, wine bars, DIY facilities, leisure complexes — compared with what we used to have.
Theatre attendances went up from eight million in 1981 to nearly 11 million in 1988.
The number of channels and networks available on television, now including Channel 4, Satellite, Cable and, shortly, Channel 5.
And there are now 15 independent radio stations in London alone, compared with three in 1979.
Brighter and flourishing inner-city areas in London, Sheffield, Newcastle, Liverpool etc — and Glasgow as the ‘European City of Culture’.
Since PRIVATISATION…
The privatisation of nationalised industries has turned millions more citizens into shareholders.
There are now over 11 million shareholders, three times as many as in 1979.
British Gas
has cut its prices to households by 13 per cent in real terms — and attracted 1,000,000 new customers.
British Telecom
has cut its prices by more than 20 per cent in real terms (and they're set to fall further).
There are nearly 30 per cent more public payphones and now, at any one time, 96 per cent of them actually work!
British Airways
has become the ‘world's favourite airline’, carrying more scheduled international passengers than any other airline in the world.
(A 1970s poll placed BA behind Aeroflot!)
British Steel
has received no subsidies.
(Between 1975 and 1985, as a nationalised industry, it cost the tax payer over £14 billion at today's prices.)
And it is now one of the most efficient and profitable steel producers in the world — having been in the Guinness Book of Records as the world's worst loss-maker.
THE OPPORTUNITIES TO BE GRASPED
We feel, then, that Britain is a country that offers more opportunity for its people than ever before.
It is not a perfect country (there never was one) and we must continue working to make it better.
But how far we've come!
Improvements are there wherever you look.
And Britain is once again a country that has found its pride, regained a high reputation in the world and is playing a leading role on the international stage — both in Europe and beyond.
Our contribution to the liberation of Kuwait (and, during the 1980s, to the protection of the Falkland Islands); our longer term contribution to the success of NATO and the collapse of the Warsaw Pact — these are matters in which we rightly take pride.
The completion of the Single European Market is also an international achievement in which Britain has played a key role.
Europe will be the setting for many further British contributions and achievements in the years to come.
For Britain and for the British people, the 1990s is a decade of real opportunity.
We now have a unique chance to build on more than a decade of solid progress, bringing further benefits and new successes to a nation that is, at last , getting used to real achievement.
‘Britain is once again a country that has found its pride, regained a high reputation in the world and is playing a leading role on the international stage — both in Europe and beyond.’
The Prime Minister with the German Chancellor, Herr Köhl.
Canary Wharf in the Docklands.
Part of the biggest development project in Europe.
TOWARDS 2000
By The Rt Hon John Major MP The Prime Minister
‘Through the 90s, Conservative Government will draw on and be sustained by our principles to ensure that Britain enters the next  millennium strong, confident, generous and free’ John Major
I first became a Member of Parliament in 1979, taking my place that summer as a back-bencher in what was to become an historic Parliament.
It is difficult to remember the scale of the task facing us then.
Memories fade, even for the participants in those events.
Many people find it virtually impossible to recollect the country we were elected to change — and did change.
This is especially true for those growing up at the time, like my own children.
There are many who have already started to vote, or will be doing so for the first time soon, with no first-hand experience of what Labour governments were like.
Of how bad they were.
Yet there really was a time when people seriously doubted whether Britain was governable any more; when we appeared to be doomed to decline; when our friends pitied us; when envy masqueraded as economic policy.
There really was a time when some thought that trade union leaders were more important than the Prime Minister and the Cabinet; when families were stopped from buying the council homes they lived in; when we were taxed more heavily on our incomes and savings than almost anyone else in the developed world; when many of our most important industries were run at enormous loss by the State.
That was our past; our Labour past.
I do not wish to see it become our future.
The Principles of Success
1979 was the watershed.
But the principles we applied were not so very novel.
What happened was that we returned to our roots.
We re-learnt the lessons that had made us a free, harmonious and prosperous nation in the past.
The principles on which recovery and success have been based are those which, like so many others, I first began to understand for myself when I was growing up and trying to make my own way in the world.
I didn't want to be pushed around or to be made dependent on others.
I wanted the freedom and the encouragement to do the best I could for myself and my family.
To study.
To get on.
To save.
To own.
To live in a stable and orderly community.
And, of course, to know that if things went wrong there would be a helping hand to pull me up.
Most people have similar simple and decent ambitions.
If the Government sets itself the job of providing a framework of laws which enables families to meet those personal goals, the country will grow in prosperity and stability.
Enterprise and Freedom
The international collapse of Socialism — a 19th century political philosophy whose time has passed — means that there is less argument today about how to run a successful country.
Enterprising market economies are always —always , not sometimes — more effective in producing a higher standard of living and a better quality of life than those in which Governments try to run too much themselves.
We know from Eastern Europe that there is an intimate connection between political liberty and economic freedom.
Regulated, socialised economies trample on human dignity, despoil the natural environment and depress economic performance.
The best way to allow an economy to flourish is to stand back and give room for choice, competition, incentive and the will to succeed.
These are the impulses that create more resources.
They never fail to do so.
This does not deny Government any role at all.
Governments have to create and maintain the conditions for success.
First among these responsibilities is to guarantee sound money.
Beating Inflation
The longer I have spent in politics, the more imperative this has seemed to me.
We used to regard any inflation as an evil; there were years in living memory when prices hardly moved from one year to the next.
But for a generation we have too often tolerated increasing levels of inflation, culminating in the disastrous hyper-inflation of the late '70s.
Inflation is not only economically debilitating; it is also cruelly unfair.
It eats into savings and hurts those who live on fixed incomes.
It attacks the foundations of a free society, encouraging those with industrial or commercial muscle to hold others to ransom.
It destroys jobs; discourages investment; erodes the country's competitiveness; and plays havoc with the Government's accounts.
The defeat of inflation — a permanent, unrelenting crusade — has to be foremost among any wise Government's objectives.
And we have set ourselves — within the European Exchange Rate Mechanism — the right framework for success in the 1990s.
Tax and Spending
Governments must also have sensible tax and spending policies.
If the increase in a Government's spending outstrips the increase in the country's income, the result is a bigger tax burden, a heavier debt burden — or both.
No politician should promise more spending without having the honesty to say how the bills will be paid.
If taxes rise to pay for bigger spending, growth falters — and taxes, or borrowing, have to go up again.
If borrowing takes the strain, taxes — not just our taxes, but the next generation's too — have to go up to service the debt.
And inflation rises, with equally calamitous results.
One of the most difficult but necessary jobs for any Government — and for any Prime Minister — is therefore to say ‘no’ to some of the many bright ideas that come forward for spending more money.
This is the uncelebrated core of prudent government.
Liberty and Personal Fulfilment
For most people, getting on in life, winning promotion, saving a bit, going on a better holiday, buying a car, purchasing a home, giving the children a better start — all these are natural aims.
Conservatives understand the engine of economic prosperity.
We are by nature the Party of free enterprise and market economics.
But this is not the whole, or even the most important part, of our view of the world.
A Government must, naturally, see that an enterprising economy operates within rules and regulations which promote fair competition and prevent damaging behaviour.
We need to protect, for example, the health and safety of employees and customers, and to avoid the pollution of our environment.
We believe that in a fair, competitive economy, men and women will be able to develop to the full, and that in doing so they will create greater prosperity for all.
But the central principles for us are individual liberty and personal fulfilment.
People build a business for their families.
They work charitably for their neighbourhood.
They fight for their country.
We only fulfil our potential as individuals in working with and for others, as well as for ourselves.
A Healthy Community
Any community is held together by a complex web of achievement, responsibility and loyalty.
A sick community stifles the individual; a healthy one encourages and celebrates individual success.
Britain is a generous country.
We have a great tradition of voluntary services and charitable giving.
We feel a keen sense of responsibility for the sick and needy.
We do not regard money as the only measure of success.
We value tolerance, and respect each other 's liberties.
I want to be sure that we retain all these characteristics of a decent and civilised society, while managing our economic fortunes competently so that we can pay for our individual and collective aspirations.
Economic success is not the only test of national well-being; but without it, a country — as we know to our cost — can become increasingly introverted, selfish and bitter.
The Roots of Crime
Just as we need sensible rules to regulate our economic behaviour, so we need firmly and fairly applied laws to ensure that we can go about our lives in freedom and security.
Crime has not, alas, been defeated by growing prosperity.
While many other countries suffer more — and more violent — crime, it is still a worrying feature of our own society.
With so many offences committed by the young, the roots of crime in home and school merit particular attention.
We will continue to need an effective and trusted police force.
Our laws must provide exemplary punishment for violent crimes.
We require prisons — a ‘Cinderella service’ for too long — that rehabilitate offenders rather than spawn recidivism.
We must fight a relentless and effective campaign against terrorism, both at home and abroad.
Defending Britain
One of the greatest successes of the postwar years has been the containment of aggressive totalitarianism in Europe.
The Soviet empire once rules half our continent — and threatened the rest.
The alliance of the free Western democracies kept up its guard for over forty years.
Now, the Berlin Wall has fallen and the barbed wire rusts away.
Our success in Europe means that we can reassess what we need to do to defend ourselves; it does not mean that we can lower our guard.
The world is still dangerous and unstable, as we found in the Falklands and the Gulf.
With so many other countries in possession of nuclear weapons — or in a position in which they soon could be — we must retain our own nuclear shield.
The Future of Europe
The sweeping changes in our continent mean that the European Community that we have created will need to open its doors to new members in the near future.
This gives sharp focus to the debate in which we are now engaged on the future of the European Community.
My generation is the first in Britain that has spent its whole career in politics within the European Community.
We are used to doing business there.
We want to make the most of our membership, and create the sort of institutions and rules which we believe are in our best interests.
The next generation will be even more familiar with the European scene than we are.
They will have travelled wider, and taken the European dimension for granted in their lives.
But I do not think they will believe it necessary to dilute our sense of national identity in order to play a full-hearted role in Europe.
Greater political and economic co-operation in the Community does not require us to forget our nationhood, and the traditions and institutions of a free people.
Responsibilities to the Old and the Young
Medical science and prosperity have brought longer life to our parents, and, inevitably, greater costs to the rest of society.
We shall need to be more flexible in the way we handle retirement, and as generous as we can be to what is fortunately a declining proportion of the retired — that is, those who rely entirely on their State pension.
No group in society benefits more from victory over inflation than pensioners.
The young, in their turn, will have to look after us one day.
That is only one reason why we must ensure that they get the best possible education and training.
A society in which all can climb as far as their talents can reach, in which the ladder of opportunity is available to every boy and girl, will be both more vital and more prosperous.
We have begun the job of raising educational standards and breaking down the barriers between the vocational and the academic routes.
We want to see better trained teachers, respected for their professionalism and rewarded for their crucial role in the community.
A fast-growing proportion of young people go on to higher education; and we want to see that proportion rise still further.
Protecting Our Environment
Our debts to the future can be paid by our commitment to a clean environment as well as to good education and training.
Reckless economic development and rapid population growth threaten the world's fragile environment.
We can no longer treat the atmosphere above us like a dustbin, and the seas around us like a sewer.
We have to contribute to a cleaner world by preventing the pollution of our own water and air, and by conserving the beauty of our countryside — whose main custodians continue to be our efficient farmers.
Environmental quality will be a watchword for the '90s.
The Citizen's Charter
I want to stamp another hallmark on the 1990s, too.
This must be the decade in which we raise the standard of all our public services, up to and beyond the best we see today.
In the 1980s, we made a start, privatising those industries Government ran so badly.
In the 1990s we must do still more to introduce choice and competition on the one hand, and to reward care and commitment on the other.
I want to restore pride in our public services.
An important ingredient in the life of every local community has always been pride in the local hospital or school.
And services dedicated to high quality performance have had an honourable place in our history.
It is a tradition I want to revive and reward.
That is what the Citizen's Charter will aim to do.
The great public services will be more rewarding to work in, and more successful in doing their job, when their purpose is seen to be pre-eminently that of living up to their title — serving the public.
The Citizen's Charter will aim to give people — parents, passengers, patients — a higher standard of service for their money; and a greater say in what their services provide.
Principles and Politics
Conservative principles are clear.
They point the way ahead.
It is difficult to know what principles — if any — guide our political opponents.
They know that to flaunt Socialism would make them unelectable.
Their one-time beliefs skulk among the wreckage of their political failures.
But if they are no longer avowed Socialists, what are they?
Devoid of vision, replete with expediency, riddled with past prejudices, they can only offer the promise of a return to a past that did not work.
Through the '90s, Conservative Government will draw on, and be sustained by, our principles to ensure that Britain enters the next millennium strong, confident, generous and free.
So long as I am Prime Minister, the administrations I lead will have these priorities:
To defend the peace; to protect personal security, at home and abroad.
We will use our influence and prestige to raise the effectiveness of the United Nations in preventing conflict.
We will fight terrorism at home and abroad.
And we will defend the citizen against lawlessness, violence and disorder.
To be at the heart of the debate about the economic and political future of Europe.
To drive down inflation.
I intend us to have a better record on inflation in the 1990s than in either the 1970s or the 1980s.
To keep taxes low, leaving people as much as possible of their own money to spend.
To promote enterprise by companies large and small, and to help create more jobs.
To carry through our Citizen's Charter and provide high standards in public services.
To enhance the opportunity society by raising the quality of our education and training.
To take privatisation further, and bring private business skills to the aid of the public sector.
To extend the Right to Own — to give more people the chance of owning their own homes, savings and pensions.
To improve our own environment and play a full part in negotiating international agreements on the world's ecology.
Above all I want to ensure that everyone is given the chance to play a full part in shaping a Britain noted throughout the world for its stability, prosperity and harmony.
Our Values
As we have seen earlier in this publication, during the 1980s, under the leadership of Margaret Thatcher, we began to shape a new Britain.
A Britain where ambition was encouraged and success rewarded.
A Britain where freedom was extended and where people took on more responsibility for running their own lives.
A Britain which saw a resurgence of enterprise, sharing greater wealth more widely than ever before.
A Britain which — as prosperity grew — could, and did, spend more on health care and the social services.
And a Britain with a growing international reputation.
Now we are taking the task forward, with even greater confidence and momentum.
Britain's new generation — in government and in business — have ambitions raised by the 1980s.
They are not like the cynics of the '60s, nor the defeatists of the '70s.
This new generation believes that only in a successful Britain can we provide everybody with opportunity; with a chance to better themselves and their families.
Only from a self-confident Britain can we look outside to play our rightful role in the wider world.
Only in a prosperous and well-governed Britain can we strengthen the ties of our community.
Only by setting our standards high can we deliver the efficient industries and good quality services in which we can all take pride.
Only in a secure Britain can we break down barriers and give people a real sense of fair play.
These are the values of the modern Conservative Party.
They are the values which will help us complete the transformation of Britain, under a Government competent, decent and strong.