

COMMUNICATIONS REVOLUTION, COMMUNICATIONS POLICY
Nations and Europes
The shifting sands of communications policy-making: actors, technologies and markets
‘WESTERN EUROPE’ takes many forms; but whether one looks at a group of about 10 nations, or a more complete group of 20 or so, the crucial difference from both the USA and Japan is the presence of a jumble of nation-states of different sizes and distinctive history.
Peter Hall, in Governing the Economy , shows that France and Britain have reflected different patterns of state intervention in the economy.
In contrast to the ‘dirigiste’ and centralist tendencies in evidence under Louis XIV, the Jacobins and Napoleon, Britain experienced a more passive and consensual style of state intervention.
The British tradition is marked by her early — eighteenth-century — industrial revolution and by nineteenth-century advocates of free trade.
France oscillated between mid-nineteenth-century free trade and, more lastingly, protectionism: slow to industrialize, France, for most of the Third Republic (1870–1940), was little given to central planning or state interventionism.
Britain, after 1945, still had worldwide markets, but these were mostly for relatively old technology products such as steam engines and steel rails.
Later industrializing nations such as Germany and Sweden, in contrast, established markets for newer technologies such as electrical goods.
France, we would add, had few long-established private sector companies in communications ‘software’ or ‘hardware’that enjoyed a significant international market presence: Hachette (1826), Havas (1832–5)— in publishing and distribution on the one hand, and in news and advertising on the other — and the CGE (1911), in electrical goods, number among the rare exceptions to the rule.
The post-1940s policy consensus in Britain, argues Hall, involved the trade unions and management, as well as the central government.
Consensus was of a rather passive kind and policy tended to rely on very general financial guidelines operated by the Bank of England and the Treasury; financial aid to industry was confined to regional development aid.
In France, by contrast, post-1940s reconstruction was marked by extensive nationalization accompanied by state planning.
The national policy consensus  excluded the trade unions; the alliance of government agencies and certain companies was more activist than in Britain; planning goals were pursued with a battery of penalty and incentive powers.
Financial assistance went via planning, pilot projects and government contracts, to specific firms and targeted economic sectors.
The policy traditions are again quite distinctive in other nations.
West Germany differs from both France and Britain; the ‘loser’ of the Second World War had — and still has — less of its high-technology effort aimed at defence, including nuclear defence.
Federal Germany has a federal constitution which awarded some communications policies (notably broadcasting) to the regional governments, and others to the central government (notably telecommunications).
Germany both benefited and suffered from the re-establishment after 1945 of its earlier strength in the electrical industries.
Germany's high-technology/ electronics exports in the early 1970s exceeded those of France and Britain combined.
But the impact of Japanese competition was all the more severe in Germany by the early- and mid-1980s.
Celebrated German electrical groups were taken over — for example AEG by Daimler-Benz and Grundig by a Philips-led consortium.
The United States also became a still more potent international competitor in the 1980S — especially in fields such as computers.
The combined Japanese USA challenge led 12 major electronics companies from five countries (France, West Germany, Britain, Italy and The Netherlands) to establish, with the EC Commission, the ESPRIT programme.
Led by Siemens and Philips, they agreed on a co-operative research and development programme, half-funded by the EC.
European companies and countries represent a bewildering array of traditions and styles.
Philips of The Netherlands announced in 1987 (nearly a century after its birth) that it was adopting a ‘global’ company orientation.
Philips already had 48 per cent of its sales outside Europe and the great bulk of its revenues and employees outside The Netherlands.
It was — unlike many European electronics companies — not heavily dependent on its home government.
But perhaps more typical of European electronics companies were those with revenues of between one billion and a few billion dollars that experienced an ‘identity crisis’ in the 1980S.
British companies such as Thorn-EMI and Plessey, for instance, faced several layers of problems and dilemmas.
Partly dependent upon home government contracts for both defence and telecommunications, they suffered from tougher procurement policies.
Such companies tended to be in a wide range of businesses; they thus lacked ‘focus’ and adequate scale.
Often they gave priority to foreign markets outside Europe, usually aiming at the USA as the biggest and best entry point for a global marketing strategy; this might involve buying struggling American companies, which continued to make losses.
Some of these electronics companies still had a family firm element, or had a shotgun marriage background, or were in some other way eccentric enterprises.
POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC FRAGMENTATION
The multiplicity of nations in Europe means that in some spheres — such as research and development expenditure and government subsidy — a large total expenditure may be fragmented across numerous economies and many ‘champion’ companies.
An extreme example of this is broadcasting expenditure.
There is a very large total number of television national channels, total hours of TV production and total revenue; but each national system still regards its own expenditure as inadequate and imports programming from other countries, notably the USA.
For all the time and money spent on developing coproductions, public and private sector companies and corporations are often reluctant to import from their neighbours.
Some channels may commission work from independent producers; but there is often a preference for either making it yourself, or importing it from afar.
French channels may buy BBC and Independent TV company programmes and in 1986 the Hersant Berlusconi ‘le Cinq’ imported programmes made for Berlusconi's Italian channels, yet otherwise it seems the four major European countries — Britain, France, West Germany, Italy — buy relatively few programmes from one another: for one French-made ‘Chateauvallon’, there are 10 Australian ‘Neighbours’or 100 US ‘Dallas’and ‘Kojak’on UK television channels.
Another characteristic of western European parliamentary democracies is the pattern of fairly frequent change from socialist to conservative governments and vice-versa.
While less true of continental Europe's many coalition governments, in France and the UK this can lead to denationalization followed by renationalization.
Newly formed governments seek deliberately to reverse their predecessors' communications policies.
And in Germany, federal governments of one political (coalition) complexion are countered (on cable and satellite for instance) by regional governments of others.
With the general drift of communications policy in a commercial market direction, the major changes tend to be introduced by governments of the right.
For example, in both West Germany and Britain in the 1980s conservative governments attempted to ‘catch up’ on introducing new technologies and new media as an antidote — as they saw it — to their socialist predecessors' delaying tactics.
But sometimes a socialist government seems bent on pre-empting such policy moves.
If this was the intention of Francois Mitterrand during the closing months of the Laurent Fabius Government (January 1985, when Mitterrand announced the advent of private sector television, to March 1986), it scarcely succeeded.
Following the appointment of Jacques Chirac as Prime Minister in  March, French broadcasting developed on radically more commercial lines: TFI, the national TV channel with traditionally the largest market share, was privatized (spring 1986–87); in the following year the number of brands advertising on TFI doubled, the maximum authorized advertising minutes per hour — all six channels take advertising — rose to 12.3 In Britain, Conservative governments introduced commercial television in 1954–5, and outlined broadcasting policies (in the November 1988 white paper) that would facilitate the development of commercial channels broadcasting by (cable and) satellite.
International deregulatory pressures and the move, discernible in much of western Europe, away from broadcasting systems funded primarily by licence free revenue, condition of course the policy options open to governments.
Nonetheless, the circumstances of each nation state are sufficiently varied, for the choice of when to apply which policy — or combination of policies — to be influenced by the political interests behind the government of the day.
The communications industries are especially politically sensitive — because of their impact on employment, on the news media, and because ‘new technology’ has traditionally had partisan overtones across Europe.
Politicians speak of ‘new spaces of freedom’(Mitterrand) and ‘increasing consumer choice’(Thatcher).
Babel results: community and ‘participatory’ media, harbingers of diversity and pluralism, become for some synonymous with the jaded journalists of Balzac's ‘Lost Illusions’— yet more venues for talking heads, phone-ins, muzak, jingles and spots.
‘The great unwashed’— the watching (and listening) public — are seen as so many target audiences by a ‘biz'ness'-minded industry to the chagrin of intellectuals or (some) professionals who dream of what might have been.
One consequence of this political salience may be that Europe experiences great communications volatility — resulting in a lack of policy consistency and commitment, and a plethora of turf wars between competing government ministries and departments.
If your eyes are always on your party political opponent, or ministerial colleague and rival, you may be paying less attention than you ought to what Hollywood, IBM and Fujitsu are doing.
BIG, SMALLER AND ‘OFFSHORE’ NATIONS
One of Europe's peculiarities is that most of its nations fall quite neatly into one of three categories, in terms of population and political-economic importance.
These vary from ‘big’ nations with over 50 million people to ‘offshore’nations with populations under one million.
Within each of these categories of national size, there are characteristic problems and policy styles.
The ‘big’ category of nations France, Britain, West Germany and Italy contain over half of western Europe's  population.
These countries pursue high-profile communications policies.
They have aimed to participate in all, or nearly all, of the major fields, and to be net exporters of major electronics hardware items (TV sets, computers, telephone switches); they also seek to have a major defence and aerospace industry and to be net exporters of television programming.
They try to minimize electronics imports from each other and are often in direct competition in export markets.
These nations also have traditional export markets to which they try to cling — France and Britain to their former colonies and language communities.
West Germany has some traditional export markets, especially in smaller neighbouring nations in central Europe, such as Austria and Switzerland.
In practice, however, these ‘big’ nations, especially since the 1960s, have had to settle more for a de facto goal of minimizing imports (mainly from the USA and Japan) and attempting to achieve a balance of imports and exports on electronics and communications trade.
The ‘smaller’ nations
The ‘smaller’ nations of western Europe are the major category.
They have populations on average of around ten million.
None of these nations attempts major efforts across all of the electronic and communications fields.
They recognize that in many ways they are junior players not only in the world league, but also within Europe.
They expect other nations to set technical standards and to innovate new markets.
They expect to be net importers of a variety of items — varying from computers to television programming.
These nations also recognize that their public sector purchasing would not be enough to maintain a full array of aerospace, telephone switch and computer industries.
Such ‘smaller’ nations typically, then, deliberately specialize and focus their national efforts on selected target areas.
In some cases these specialized efforts are among Europe's most successful on the world scene.
Notable are Philips (Netherlands) and several Swedish companies — including Ericsson, a world player in telecommunications equipment exporting, and Electrolux, a world leader in kitchen electrical goods.
These smaller countries also present any ‘European’ policy efforts with special problems for another reason.
They include some nations — especially in northern Europe — which are sophisticated in terms of technology and policy, and are among Europe's wealthiest nations but which are not members of the European Community.
Examples include not only Sweden, but Switzerland and Finland.
Finally, these ‘smaller’ nations include such genuinely small nations as Portugal and Greece, as well as much larger Spain — a group of poorer southern nations which, since 1986, constitute an important grouping within the EC.
Their entry to the EC expanded its population by over 60 million people.
Equally significantly they provide, like Ireland earlier, attractive locations for multinational companies — inside the EC's open market, and offering cheaper local labour.
Spain quickly became an attractive new location for American and Japanese, as well as European, electronics companies.
The ‘offshore’ nations
These are the small principalities, mostly around the borders of France, which are especially important in broadcasting policy.
Luxembourg and Monte Carlo are the most celebrated examples.
Paradoxically these ‘international’ locations have mainly had an impact only at the national level, notably in France.
But their Trojan horse' threat has encouraged pre-emptive national policy moves in a commercial direction.
Luxembourg has had this impact not only in France, but also in Belgium and to an increasing extent in West Germany.
Luxembourg's location at the heart of Europe and as a founder-member of the EC, has de facto constituted a potent lobbying force within the EC for free market/commercial communications policies within Europe and across national boundaries, notably in the EC/CE debate on ‘television without frontiers’.
One consequence of this layering of different sizes and characters of nation within Europe is a political-economic and policy pyramid, which is built on shifting grounds and whose complex detail is always changing.
Some of the generalizations above are, for this reason alone, inevitably subject to challenge.
But few can doubt that Europe's varied assortment of nations makes for a conflicting assortment of company commercial strategies and government policies.
CONFLICTING TRADITIONS: PUBLIC SERVICE, CARTEL, FREE MARKET
Europe is not the only part of the world in which communications and electronics are the inheritors of several different, and apparently conflicting, policy traditions.
Many countries around the world have inherited traditions of ‘public service’, ‘cartels’, and the ‘free market’.
Public service traditions are the norm in western Europe in at least three fields.
Telecommunications was typically put inside a state postal service or ministry and operated as a public utility, like the postal service or the water supply.
When radio arrived in its broadcasting form around 1920 it also was slotted into the telecoms pattern.
Thirdly, all nations ran their defence, and later aerospace, industries on a primarily public service model.
The hardware for these various services was in Europe typically supplied by commercial companies.
The telecoms and defence of officials usually preferred to buy from a small group of two or three national companies.
So also the national  electricity grids, when these appeared.
These companies in practice then became part of a national cartel.
However in all of these fields there was a still older tradition of the free market and elements of this were present in early strands of competition in both telecoms and radio; these, however had often been eradicated by the mid-twentieth century.
Of course, the press had been the earliest communications free market, even if , in practice, most European nations have long had an additional element of political party patronage and state aid to individual titles and to the sector as a whole.
The free market principle (or ideology) was for long forcefully advocated in the USA — most notably in the film business (which also had remarkable cartel elements of its own).
After 1950 the newer electronics offerings appeared in double form — they had close ties to defence and public service, but they also appeared in Europe as forceful standard-bearers for the free market approach.
The European computer industry has thus acquired a predominantly free market policy regime (with, of course, significant elements of the other policy traditions).
From the viewpoint of technological convergence, therefore, Europe exhibits communications policy fragmentation.
A piece of equipment can be highly regulated in terms of one use, while a similar piece of equipment is unregulated for another use.
This then is a second dimension of fragmentation — of an apparently chaotic jumble of conflicting policy traditions — placed on top of the jumble of separate nations.
ECONOMIC EUROPE, DEFENCE EUROPE, AND OTHERS
Another major problem is that there are so many ‘Europes’, even in western Europe.
The most glaring contrast is between the EC and the defence alliance of NATO.
The EC includes France and excludes the USA; NATO includes the USA, but France (see table 1.1) is not a member of the alliance's integrated command.
Or — to continue with the EC example — countries from outside Europe (in Africa, for instance) enjoy a closer relationship as associate member countries than European countries belonging to the other major economic grouping, EFTA — the European Free Trade Association.
In Defending Europe in the 1990s,Joseph Rallo identifies ‘the new divide in high technology’; tension results from this EC/NATO divide in general, and over high-technology problems in particular .
The United States feels that it is shouldering too heavy a defence burden in Europe, whilst Europe has increasingly become an economic rival of the United States; Europeans resent their separate defence and economic dependence on the United States, but    have been slow to recognize their de facto commitment to an unrealistic and arbitrary divide between economic and strategic policies.
Europe has major high-technology achievements to its credit — most notably in the field of co-operative projects in both civil aviation (the Airbus family) and military aviation (the Tornado fighter).
But Rallo sees these projects as excessively subsidized and as exceptions to Europe's general lack of finesse and vision in high technology.
In the United States, R&D work funded by the Department of Defense and conducted by a winning firm under contract, is subsequently made available to the entire relevant US industry.
In contrast European nations have allowed contracting companies to keep their R&D findings secret from other companies; with this kind of practice occurring across a dozen nations, European defence R&D is often wasted as well as fragmented.
In communications policy NATO and the EC are among the more important ‘Europes’.
But the Council of Europe is important especially on media, software and legal issues.
There are also, of course, separate western European groupings, for example in space (ESA), in telecommunications (EUTELSAT and CEPT) and in broadcasting (EBU).
In addition to such major intergovernmental or ‘public service’ bodies, there are numerous Europe-wide trade associations.
The number of such organizations is not the problem.
What adds to the fragmentation of policy is that these organizations represent so many different definitions of ‘Europe’.
Some — such as NATO and OECD — include nations from other continents; others include only some of the nations of western Europe.
The combination of narrowly defined sectoral professional subject matter with diverse memberships inevitably means that these ‘European’ policy bodies contribute to the very policy fragmentation which they seek to reduce.’
EUROPEAN COMPANIES' RIPOSTE: BIG, MEDIUM AND NICHE STRATEGIES
Of course numerous policy dilemmas and conflicts also confronted the United States and Japan in the 1980S; problems of high cost and prices were exacerbated at times by exchange rate fluctuations.
Meanwhile, some European companies have long been successful at the world super-company level (table 3).
In particular Siemens and Philips in 1987/8 both had an annual turnover in the region of $25 billion; this was approximately a third more than that of British Telecom.
BT had higher profits than either, presumably reflecting its still de facto monopoly situation.
Siemens also was more profitable, probably because more sheltered within West Germany, than Philips.
Both of these companies are multi-product electronics enterprises, both also specialize to some extent.
Again, to become a third ‘big’ European company was one of the aims of the  
CGE-Alcatel takeover of ITT's European subsidiaries in 1986.
This is, of course, another broad-gauge electronics group but with emphasis on telecoms equipment.
The resultant, Dutch-based, CGE-ITT subsidiary, Alcatel NV, is the world number 2 in telecommunications equipment.
Nonetheless, many medium-sized (by world standards) European companies were in difficulties in the 1980S.
These included broad-gauged, multi-product electronics companies.
By contrast, some of the successes of the 1980S were companies which targeted one distinctive market.
One outstanding example was Reuters, the British news agency which, from the 1970s, struck gold in the electronic financial data business.
Another was Nixdorf, the German computer company, which targeted specific business markets, for example offering a business package of hardware, software and services to banks; Nixdorf also successfully entered the privileged circle of recognized suppliers to the Bundespost.
MULTINATIONALS AND BRANCH PLANTS
It would be a mistake to assume that all multinational companies which are established in a number of European countries necessarily thereby reap enormous advantages and profits.
When ITT in I 986 agreed to be merged into CGE-Alcatel, there were fully, or majority, owned ITT subsidiaries in West Germany, Belgium, Italy, Spain, Austria, The Netherlands, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Australia and Portugal.
Earlier in the 1980s ITT also controlled subsidiaries in France and Britain.
And yet this multinational telecoms enterprise was losing money.
The prospect of severing its loss-making European empire made ITT shares rise sharply on Wall Street.
It may be that the continuing strength of the state interest in telecommunications across Europe leads multinational telecoms enterprises to make too many, and too cosy, accommodations with local political forces.
Another field in which a non-European presence is evident across Europe is television programming.
Here the market position is quite different.
In most cases strong or monopoly buyers (national TV systems (confront American sellers, who have already covered their costs at home.
The result is substantial sales, but at low prices — operating worthwhile, but quite modest, revenue.
Films are more lucrative because there is a genuine market.
Different again is the case of IBM.
Here the main customer is business organizations.
There are real markets and real prices.
One consequence of this was that IBM Deutschland, IBM France and IBM UK were all in Europe's top 100 companies by sales in 1985; together these three IBM subsidiaries had sales of nearly $16 billion — about 30 per cent of IBM's world sales.
No European computer company ranked among the world ‘top ten’ in 1986; and IBM's turnover was greater than the aggregate turnover of the next g companies.
STRATEGIC DILEMMAS: GLOBALISM, CONVERGENCE, TARGETING
In the late 1980s widely agreed truisms of the world electronics industry include the following:
1.
Major companies must operate on a global scale.
2.
Companies must position themselves to exploit the technological convergence between communications and computing.
3.
Companies must target significant sectors for their world marketing strategies to attack.
One must remember, however, that most of these truisms derive from American (or Japanese) businessmen and commentators, who tend to have in mind such American companies as IBM and GE.
The author of Triad Power,'which popularized the notion of a global market dominated by the US, Japan and Europe, was a Japanese employee of the American McKinsey company.
Some of the propounders of such statements might be guilty of promoting their own companies.
For smaller European companies with smaller home markets, the adoption of such strategic ‘truisms’ is not axiomatic.
Targeting particular sectors sounds fine, but other strong competitors may already be targeting the very same areas.
Technological Convergence is also a nice idea, but it may lead strong companies into major new markets where they lack experience and fail to achieve success.
Telecommunications companies as varied as AT&T, Ericsson in Sweden and Standard Telephones and Cable in Britain, have all followed the convergence theory into computers, but without great success so far.
Even the basic action of the global strategy has obvious pitfalls.
If you are not big enough yourself you must pursue an active alliance strategy.
Certainly you must enter the US domestic market — since 40 per cent of the global market is there.
Here, however, you confront both the American and Japanese companies at their most aggressive and on familiar turf.
Some Euro-cynics even suspect that American companies may deliberately seek to lure naive European competitors into the eagle's nest.
Whether or not such strategies exist, numerous European electronics companies have tried to enter the US market, but few have made much impression and even fewer much profit.
Reuters, in information technology and services, is the proverbial exception that proves the rule.
EUROPEAN POLICY GOALS AND NATIONAL POLICY ASSUMPTIONS
Most governments and political parties in western Europe agree that Europe must do more in the way of co-operative research and development, the establishment of European technical standards, and so on.
During the 1980s a number of such co-operative enterprises came into existence — for example ESPRIT, EUREKA, FAST and RACE.
Other co-operative activities exist via various specialized European associations — for example the European Space Agency — and, of course, in certain co-operative military weapons programmes.
Each nation also simultaneously pursues national policies of various kinds.
The larger nations, especially, seek to export to their traditional customers, language communities, and former colonies; and they seek to develop various joint ventures and alliances with American and Japanese companies.
But individual nations also have recourse to the selective use of various devices for bending the rules of international free trade.
West Germany has a PTT — the Bundespost — with exceptionally commanding ways; moreover the presence of some of the regulatory control at the Land (regional) level can  lead to a policy chaos which Germans, let alone foreigners, can find difficult to penetrate.
Paris is, of course, the home of the other historically famous European bureaucracy; it also is famous and notorious for its defence of French trading interests.
A celebrated example of French masterly inactivity was the French policy of discouraging imports of Japanese video cassette recorders.’
Such tactical devices are among the many outward and visible signs that national policy-making and policy assumptions still prevail in Europe: governments often tend to assist national champion companies first.
In the mid and late 1980s the development of joint ventures allegedly helped arrest European decline.
The EC Commission identified 46 European partnerships in information high-technology industries — electronics, computing, telecommunications — in 1986, compared to six in 1983.
In the late 1980s, the French CGE-controlled Alcatel NV became the world telecoms number two company; France's state-controlled Groupe Bull acquired 42.5 per cent(March 1987) of the US computing firm Honeywell Inc. that had previously been its shareholder; another French company, Thomson, acquired the TV manufacturing division of America's General Electric, and joined Philips in competing in television equipment manufacturing against the Japanese.
In micro-chips, Philips, Siemens and the Italo-French SGS-Thomson together fund R&D for the ‘super’ microchips of the next — post-1990s — generation: in aerospace the Euro-consortium Airbus competes against Boeing and McDonnell Douglas, and the ESA's Ariane against NASA's space launchers.
In many of these projects France, we shall argue, apparently succeeds better than Britain in equating the defence of national champions with European joint ventures.
Space: Franco-British contrasts
SPACE illustrates the differences between French and British policy and the complexities of making policy across a wide range of ‘communications’.
Space may well exaggerate such differences.
But it also poses problems and dilemmas which occur in communications policy more widely.
The contrast between British and French space policy could hardly be more marked.
After 1945 Britain was the European leader in space, but from the early 1960s onwards Britain sharply cut back its involvement in space.
France after 1960 quite quickly became the leader of western European activities in space and seems certain so to remain beyond the year 2000.
Much space policy in Europe has derived from military considerations.
France wanted its own delivery system for nuclear weapons; Britain in 1962 bought such a delivery system from the USA; West Germany did not have its own nuclear weapons to deliver.
Space also illustrates the much-celebrated technological convergence of telecommunications, computing, and media.
A space programme was relevant to delivering bombs, as well as to hoisting Intelligence satellites.
Space also meant international telephone calls; and space systems not only incorporate advanced computers but also facilitate the worldwide movement of data between computer terminals.
Not least space involves the convergence of mass media technologies with those of the telephone and the computer.
Since the 1960s the main impact of space on the world's citizens has been the arrival of television pictures ‘live by satellite’.
And one of space's most dramatic promises — or threats — has been the imminence of broadcasting by satellite directly into the homes of another nation's citizens.
Direct broadcasting by satellite (DBS) was a long time coming; but well before its arrival in Europe in 1989 the image of DBS and the reality of low-, medium- and high-powered satellites and of satellite-to-cable systems had already had a profound impact on broadcasting policy.
In particular the satellite ‘threat’ helped to unleash an irreversible flood of new TV channels in Europe.
This dramatic dimension has been an important aspect of rockets from the German 1944 V-2s onwards and of satellites from the Soviet 1957 Sputnik onwards.
Space programmes symbolized comparative levels of national  achievement in exotic or ‘high’ technologies.
The ‘space race’, then, is a combination of arms race, competition in telephones and data transfer, plus a contest in television and show business.
Space is an extreme example of the need for long-term commitments.
To mount a significant space effort takes decades.
France's increased commitment to space, which dates from the late 1950s, did not really come to fruition until the late 1970s.
This emphasis on long time-spans raises the question of whether a national space programme constitutes an example of policy or planning or both.
French ‘state capitalism’ scored a notable success with the space programme; via ‘une politique volontariste’, the state engaged aggressively in entrepreneurial activities in piloting high-technology companies.
Research and development was heavily directed into selected areas.
This contrasts sharply with Britain where — after 1962 — the space effort was deliberately spread thinly around a large number of agencies and the governmental approach was distinctly non-entrepreneurial.
Space programmes also highlight contrasts in administrative and managerial elites.
In France the representative bureaucrat involved in space has had an elite technical or scientific education and sees himself as the partner and motivator of the innovative businessman.
In Britain the representative bureaucrat involved in space has a non-technical background and sees his task as restraining the expensive ambitions of the ‘space lobby’.
In both French and British space programmes, keeping up with — or at least not falling further behind — the USA and USSR space efforts has long been the name of the game.
One view is that since France and Britain have developed only semi-token nuclear deterrents, they only require semi-token space programmes.
Certainly the scale even of French space operations, on a cost-per-inhabitant basis, is much smaller than either those of the USA or USSR.
Total French expenditure is only a few per cent of total US space expenditure.
Britain in the 1940s and 1950s saw itself as having a major power (primarily military) space programme.
But after deciding in 1962 to buy American, Britain in effect cut back its space ambitions from major to minimal.
France, on the other hand, came later to the game and always had more modest and more realistic ambitions — France decided, in effect, to be the leader of the second-rank space players.
In pursuit of this goal France also decided to minimize the military and to highlight the civilian and communications facets of its space programme.
The relative prominence of the telecommunications, television and European primus inter pares aspects of the French space programme have had another important consequence.
The French space programme — Ariane in particular has more popular appeal to the domestic electorate.
This contrasts with the  decline in popular and Congressional support seen in the United States after the Apollo moon landing space spectaculars around 1970.
The British policy stance since 1962 has been sceptical of space in general, and of its economic viability in particular .
France, however, has gone some way to showing that a judicious space programme — based on modest goals and less than the highest technology of the era — need not be excessively costly.
Much depends of course upon what is meant by ‘success’ as well as by ‘policy’and ‘planning’.
We shall argue that French and British policy-making differ less than is often supposed.
‘Turf warfare’ between competing government ministries; political indecisions and revisions; lack of government-industry co-ordination — all of these are commonplace, even normal, in both France and Britain.
It may be that the term ‘policy’ does not fit either France or Britain especially well.
One distinction is the French ideology of the fresh start and the ‘plan’— which goes beyond the vogue for state planning that reached its high plateau under de Gaulle.
In Britain there is a preference for a tactical step-by-step approach against a background of traditional consensus.
These differences may be reflected in the two nations' space programmes — the French march onwards, their plans to the fore, while the British cautiously conducted a step-by-step withdrawal.
French state and technocentric-inspired planning have had great successes in both telecommunications and space; but the British have had their acknowledged successes also — most notably in the broadcasting field, where a traditional consensual policy has been modified step-by-step and channel-by-channel down the decades since 1922.
In broadcasting the French predilection for state leadership, fresh starts and grand plans is widely regarded as being less than a great success.
In other fields — most notably those concerned with computers — both France and Britain have been far from successful.
BRITISH SPACE NON-POLICY AFTER SUEZ
For both France and Britain the Suez fiasco of 1956 was a formative experience; but the two imperial powers drew different strategic conclusions.
France decided not to rely upon either the Americans or the perfidious British — a reaction which was strengthened by the return to power of Charles de Gaulle (May 1958).
Britain drew different conclusions — to continue its imperial withdrawal and to avoid any repetition of the UK-USA conflict of 1956.
Britain withdrew into what it regarded as a ‘special relationship’ in defence with the USA, which the French saw as a relationship of strategic dependence.
After 1962, when Macmillan persuaded President Kennedy at the Nassau meeting to let him have Polaris, the British space effort lost the committed patronage of the Ministry of  Defence.
Britain subsequently had an official policy of a very small British space effort split between a number of government agencies; this involved ultimate dependence upon the USA in military space and upon Europe (mainly France) in civil space.
British space policy faced the dilemma of choosing between the Commonwealth, USA and Europe.
Britain's initial strategy had been a smaller version of the comprehensive US and USSR space programmes.
The prime British emphasis was upon delivering nuclear weapons into eastern Europe.
Britain also wanted to be a major force in space science research; thirdly would come communications satellites.
As with the Americans and the Russians, Britain's post-war rocket research began with firings of captured German V-2 rockets.
In the 1950s, and alongside its nuclear weapons and its V-bombers, Britain also undertook the building of an intermediate-range ballistic missile, Blue Streak.
But Harold Macmillan's premiership (1957–63) was marked by two key decisions, which removed the main need for a space policy (delivering nuclear weapons) and the main sponsorship of space — the Prime Minister of the day and the Ministry of Defence.
Firstly, on 13 April 1960 the House of Commons was told that the Macmillan Cabinet had decided to cancel Blue Streak; instead the Skybolt air-launched missile (designed to extend the life and range of the V-bombers) would be purchased from the USA.
The second decision, personally negotiated by Macmillan at Nassau, was to substitute the submarine-launched Polaris missile for Skybolt.
The new Kennedy administration had decided to cancel Skybolt.
During the Nassau meeting of 18–2I December 1962, President Kennedy ignored strong contrary advice and agreed to let Macmillan have Polaris.
Macmillan saw Polaris as an ideal strategic weapon acquired at a modest cost; he saw the Nassau negotiations as a diplomatic and political triumph.
Britain was now to receive the most advanced submarine-launched missile system; there was thus no continuing strategic need for a British effort in space.
This was not fully comprehended by everyone at the time, although Macmillan and the Treasury recognized it.
In fact Macmillan had established Britain's space policy for decades to come: in military space Britain was dependent on the USA; in civil space Britain would take part in co-operative European ventures.
However during 1960–3 there was some support for a British Commonwealth non-military space programme.
In 1960 a major proposal was put forward for a British and Commonwealth programme by a consortium of Britain's main aerospace and electronics companies — called the British Space Development Company (BSDC).
The chairman was Lord Renwick (of Associated Television) and the Chief Executive Director was to be Geoffrey Pardoe, the Project Manager of the just-cancelled Blue Streak rocket.
The plan  was to use a modified version of the cancelled Blue Streak and to offer a range of communications services via satellite, including television.
This 1960 proposal thus predated the major space proposals put forward by President Kennedy early in 1961 — proposals which included the moon-landing programme and what became the INTELSAT world telecommunications system.
The BSDC consortium presented a commercial prospectus in 1961 to the City of London and to the British government.
The proposal included provision for a world system of tracking stations in Australia and other Commonwealth countries.
The British government took its advice from the Post Office, which reported adversely.
Doubtless this reflected Treasury reluctance to enter such an enterprise.
The Commonwealth Conference of March 1963 discussed the issue but showed little enthusiasm.
The third policy option for Britain was Europe.
Here Britain's involvement was to be more significant, but still very modest indeed for a nation which in 1960 was far ahead of the rest of western Europe in space.
This British leadership in technology caused impatience (and resentment) and was a barrier to Britain's becoming a commercial and political leader of the European nations, some of which were only making very early and tentative expenditures on space research.
Having cancelled Blue Streak in 1960, Britain proposed that the technology be incorporated into a co-operative European effort.
The French proposed a programme based on a British first-stage and a French (Coralie) second-stage rocket.
In 1962 ELDO was set up on this basis — with the L standing for launcher.
Subsequently another separate organization, ESRO, was founded in 1964 for science space research.
After much painful experience it was decided in 1973 to fold both ELDO and ESRO into a single European Space Agency (ESA).
But long before the appearance of the ESA, European leadership in space had passed from Britain to France.
The House of Commons Estimates Committee in 1967 recognized this: no less than nine Whitehall departments were involved in a rather low level of activity.
France was already much better at gaining contacts for ESRO, because France had related existing work in its national programme:
The United Kingdom has quite as much skill and technical resources as France, yet we have been worsted time and again by the French in the field of space, simply because the French have a centrally directed, planned, national space programme and we have not.
(13th Report from the Estimates Committee, House of Commons, Session 1966–7.
HMSO, July 1967, p. xxiii.)
Britain's experience with ELDO (the launcher consortium) was even more traumatic than its experience with the European satellite industry in ESRO.
The British Blue Streak — almost uniquely in space history — had a 100 per cent success rate; this first-stage rocket worked correctly 11 times out of 11.
But the other stages failed 11 times out of 11.
Britain withdrew in 1969.
Britain — after the traumas of the 1960s — looked for a modest space policy, low profile and low risk.
Most of the modest expenditure since 1970 has gone into ESA on joint projects.
The only consistent area of preference in British policy has been satellites ; the other two major components of launchers and ground stations have (contrary to French doctrine) been left to others.
Satellites seemed to offer Britain a useful area, high in technology and science and fairly low in financial risk.
Britain's highest profile space commitment was to the ESA L-SAT programme (later called Olympus); this was the high-power, high-science, satellite from which the French and Germans withdrew in order to prepare (from 1979) to launch their own DBS satellite outside the ESA — for their TVSat and TDF-I efforts.
Britain and Italy were left as dominant Olympus partners.
Although British Aerospace, with France's Matra, provided the first batch of Eutelsat communications satellites, the second round was awarded to an Aerospatiale/Alcatel Thomson Espace/MBB consortium, with the British GEC in a modest supporting role.
British preference for low risk and high science did not eliminate risk.
It is true that British Aerospace has a good total record — especially if one includes the OTS, ECS and Maritime satellites.
But these activities have been conducted at a loss, and the competition both from Europe and the USA has intensified.
In the 1980s Britain was coasting along as the fourth-largest west European R&D spender on space — behind France, Germany and Italy.
The British space effort was without a powerful sponsor.
The Treasury view of space as a financial black hole still prevailed.
The Ministry of Defence had its continuing missile special relationship with the United States, whose Department of Defense had agreed to substitute the Trident submarine-missile system for Polaris.
The British special intelligence relationship with the USA also involved US launches of British Aerospace Skynet military intelligence satellites.
The privatized British Telecom acquired several satellite interests.
BT is the British representative in EUTELSAT and INTELSAT — the European and   world telecommunications satellite bodies.
But in each case BT is a relatively quiescent member, not seriously challenging the French leadership of EUTELSAT or the US leadership of INTELSAT.
The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) dealt with civil space, but most of its modest annual expenditure went to the ESA and related scientific research.
However in September I 984 a new (junior) Minister for Industry and Information Technology was appointed at DTI.
He was Mr Geoffrey Pattie, and he was given special responsibility for space; numerous bullish stories appeared in the press about the likelihood of increased British space expenditure.
A new co-ordinating British National Space Centre was established, as yet without a space policy.
The time seemed ripe for a cabinet and prime ministerial intervention which would give Britain a higher profile space policy.
Immediately after the June 1987 General Election victory the nature of the prime ministerial intention at last became clear.
Mrs Thatcher duly sacked the junior minister, space enthusiast Geoffrey Pattie.
Britain's now-traditional space non-policy had once more been confirmed.
Space was left to the private sector.
1957–62: FRANCE EMBRACES SPACE
The launching of Sputnik-I, in 1957, prompted the French government notably Roger Seydoux in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs — to bring together several disparate publicly funded space research projects.
On 7 January 1959 a committee for space research (Comité des Recherches Spatiales) was created by government decree.
Initially, the military factor appeared paramount, as the decision to develop France's independent nuclear deterrent presupposed the existence of a French-made booster rocket and missile.
On 18 December 1961 the Committee for Space Research declared itself in favour of the development of the Diamant rocket.
Next day de Gaulle, advised by Prime Minister Michel Debré and the Minister for Scientific Research, Pierre Guillaumat, decided to create a National Centre for Space Research (CNES).
This body (with 2200 employees in 1987) subsequently became the centrepiece of France's domestic and European space policy.
The period clarified the roles and powers of two major state R&D bodies namely CNES (space) and CNET (telecommunications).
Previously the CNET had been the leading R&D agency not only in telecoms but in ‘the prehistory of the space programme.
Dating from 1944, the CNET had been ‘born again' in the period 1955–8.
As early as December 1955 the military, via the CASDN (Armaments Agency), had a seat on the board of the CNET, and encouraged satellite-related  research.
Sud Aviation and the CNET's Télécommande department together developed liquid hydrogen rockets — Véronique and Monica (test launches: March 1959 — December 1961).
In 1959 the French space programme was launched officially with the creation of the above-mentioned committee for space research.
In 1959 the CNET submitted to the committee a research programme budgeted at 7 billion francs over six years.
For the year 1959 the CNET was allocated 40 percent of the total space budget.
Ten years later, in the late 1960s, some 600 of CN ET's 3100 personnel were working on space research.
Prime Minister Michel Debré and the space research committee entrusted the post-telecoms authority (in effect the CNET) with responsibility for telecommunication satellite reception experiments.
The CNET rapidly built (October 1961 to July 1962) an earth station at Pleumeur-Bodou (in Brittany): the first TV pictures by trans-Atlantic satellite were transmitted from Andover (Maine) to Pleumeur-Bodou during the night of 10 and 11 July 1962.
It was precisely when the CNET scored its greatest success — at Pleumeur-Bodou -that it lost its quasi-monopoly.
For the role of the CNET in space research changed with the creation of the CNES between December 1961 and March 1962.
The CNES was a different kind of organization.
While its staff of 17 in 1962 rose to nearly 500 by 1965, it was primarily an organization that defined French space policy objectives and priorities and co-ordinated relations between public and private sector interests in the nascent space industry.
As a public corporation ('epic’), it acted for the state in contracting work out to arms and electronics manufacturers.
The CNES implemented the French policy of co-operating with other European nations to create ELDO (launcher) and ESRO (science).
But perhaps the most valuable work achieved by CNES in the 1960s lay in co-ordinating the development of the French space industry: in 1964 the decision was taken to build a launch site at Kourou in French Guyana; in November 1965 the Diamant A rocket was successfully launched from an Algerian site — the swansong of a military programme based in a former French territory.
Writing with hindsight, one expert on French space policy says of the French Diamant and the ELDO — Europa rocket experiments of the 1960s and early 1970s: Judged in terms of their operational capacity, the results were nonexistent.’
Another argument is that Diamant provided invaluable technological know-how, while ELDO-Europa was a cautionary tale of how not to organize a complex European space co-operation programme.
The failure to develop, between 1965 and 1972, a European space rocket within ESRO had political and economic causes.
But a factor which French observers stress, when comparing French space policy-making with that of several other European partners, in the 1980s, as in the early 1960s, is the centralized control exercised by the French government, through CNES.
Vital decisions in the definition and  the implementation of space policy were taken by inter-ministerial meetings presided over by the Prime Minister or the President; a public body, the CNES, exercised the central and unified control desired by the state.
FRANCE AND THE EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY
The European Space Agency (ESA) was of officially born in May 1975, following a decision to merge ELDO and ESRO and to create a strong European space policy-making body.
But a decade later, French observers continued to lament the absence in most of the 12 other member-states of ESA of strong centralized and specialized space policy-making bodies such as the CNES: ‘In Germany, the DFVLR covers a much wider sector than that of the CNES but does not exercise political responsibility; in Britain, responsibility is dispersed among the end-users such as British Telecom.’
French space policy seeks to achieve autonomy via European co-operation.
Under de Gaulle, the independent nuclear deterrent, and the Franco-British Concorde project, were higher and more costly priorities than space policy.
But France sought to lessen its dependence on USA/NASA research and European co-operation appeared the only viable alternative.
The European Space Agency, first proposed in December 1972 at Brussels, proved a more efficient tool in co-ordinating European space policies than ELDO and ESRO (which it took over).
Many difficulties remained.
The Germans and the British were both more used than the French to co-operating closely with the USA and responded positively to NASA's 1969 invitation to work on its Space-Lab programme, linked to the space shuttle concept, which succeeded the Apollo moon-landings.
ESA therefore agreed to co-operate on Space-Lab, with the Germans as the main European partner.
France saw Space-Lab as an American attempt to control European space research.
The development of a truly European rocket capable of placing satellites in orbit remained the French first priority.
It was difficult to win over European partners given the degree of US advance in the field, and the failure of the ELDO European launcher development project.
Furthermore, at a time of heart-searching following the commercial difficulties of the Anglo-French Concorde project, and with de Gaulle no longer in power, the French space science community had difficulty in persuading the politicians of the need for France to go it alone in space.
The 1972–4 compromise was the result: ESA association in the Space-Lab project; the development of an independent European rocket capable of bearing a heavy payload.
The French argument for an independent European launcher, Ariane, was accepted (1973).
The development costs of Ariane accounted for 30 per cent of French space spending between 1974 and 1979.
France agreed to pay more than half the cost of the programme provided that it  was entrusted with its production and provided, also, that the rocket remain geared to the commercial needs of the 1980s and early 1990s.
This last point is less self-evident than appears initially.
Some of the divisions in ELDO and ESRO stemmed from the classical opposition between scientists set on ‘pure’ space research, and those who stressed the need to launch telecommunications and meteorological satellites.
‘A national ambition that can only be realised at the European level.’
This account of quixotic French space policy motivation should not mask the resolutely national, if not nationalist, emphasis of government policy towards space under de Gaulle and Pompidou.
Similarly, while CNES was concerned with the peaceful uses of space, the stress placed on France-in-Europe owning an independent rocket launch system echoed French emphasis on owning an independent nuclear deterrent.
The rocket launch system, developed via Véronique and Diamant, which led to Ariane, was initially conceived for the French military.
Between 1965 and 1967 the Direction Technique des Engins (DTEn) of the Ministry of Defence launched four Diamant A rockets; one carried the satellite (26 November 1965), dubbed Asterix — whose successful launch made France the third country to launch an artificial earth satellite.
Diamant A rockets also placed into orbit three satellites developed by the CNES.
Likewise, military research into the use of liquid hydrogen as the means of propulsion would subsequently be pursued by CNES, ELDO and ESA, prior to its successful use in Ariane.
Finally, France sought to locate the rocket launching site on French territory, and not to follow ELDO's use of Woomera in Australia.
After an initial use of a launching site in Algeria, the CNES choice for its rocket launching site fell on Kourou in French Guyana, whose 5° North equatorial location was also extremely cost-effective.
In the de Gaulle and Pompidou years France was so far behind the USA and the USSR, and the attempts at European co-operation were still so petulant, that space policy was not a high national priority.
Public opinion also remained largely indifferent to both Kourou and the other activities of CNES.
France began serious rocket research in 1953, seven years after the two super (space) powers; in 1965, NASA employees numbered nearly 300,000 while the CNES employed under 1000.
Yet the successful launch of the first Diamant A rocket with its rudimentary A I ‘Asterix’ satellite (or space capsule) nonetheless made France the world's third power in space — a feat achieved eight years after the Russians but with minimal resources compared with those of the Russians or the Americans.
Political capital was made of the achievement.
De Gaulle signed a Franco-Soviet space co-operation agreement, and the CNES became a tool of French foreign policy.
France did not conclude an agreement with the USA on the peaceful uses of space comparable to that signed in June 1966 with the Soviet Union.
Since 1967, Franco-Soviet space co-operation (between CNES and  Intercosmos) has proceeded smoothly, whereas French-US co-operation has had more downs than ups, with CNES resentment at some NASA attitudes of superiority becoming a mutually reinforcing vicious circle.
Piloted by the CNES, nurtured by the Ariane programme, France's space industries developed rapidly after 1973.
Yet French and European success in catching up, in some areas, with the USA only heightened the awareness of their puny, David-like, resources.
In 1987 the CNES had 2200 employees, and the entire French space industry had only 9000 employees.
These were located mostly in two areas — launcher rockets (primarily the Ariane programme), accounting for 50 per cent of the workforce and satellites for 45 per cent.
The creation of a corporate sense of identity for France's space industry is due largely to the CNES, and to pride in the early (1979–86) success of the Ariane programme.
But partly because of the diversity of the French companies involved, and partly because of the distances separating the various European companies working for the CNES and ESA programmes, ‘catching up with the Americans’ has been an important unifying goal.
EMERGING FRANCO-EUROPEAN SPACE AUTONOMY: THE 1980S
It was in the specific field of telecommunications satellites that the American space industry first perceived a serious European competitive threat.
For much of the 1970S a wide range of European satellites were placed in orbit by American (and in a few cases Soviet) launchers.
After the 1974 decision to abandon the Diamant programme, France was without a launcher.
The November 1972 decision by the French government to invite its European partners to develop a launcher, the L-35, took seven years to produce the first successful Ariane launch, on 24 December 1979.
But in the early 1970S the French and German governments were interested, like the Americans, in telecommunications.
Thus, in September 1974, the first Franco-German telecommunications satellite, Symphony, was launched by NASA.
Next year, a US Thor-Delta rocket launched the second Symphony satellite.
Initially, these Franco-German telecommunications satellites did not trouble US interests; they were experimental or confined to educational or other non-commercial purposes.
They were pygmies compared to the current INTELSAT 4A satellites.
To the French, INTELSAT appeared the creature of US interests; the initial proposal for the global telecommunications satellite organization had been made by President Kennedy back in 1961.
Some people in INTELSAT saw the Franco-German Symphony satellites as the thin edge of the wedge.
INTELSAT subsequently had to learn to live with EUTELSAT, the space club of the national European telecommunications administrations.
In the 1970S, Symphony and other French or European satellites remained  dependent on US rockets for their launch.
But work on the Ariane launcher advanced, as did French national and European co-operative work on telecommunications and meteorological satellites.
In September 1977 the decision was made to undertake the SPOT remote-sensing programme; the SPOT- I satellite (launched by Ariane, V- I 6) transmitted its first high-resolution pictures in 1986.
To read documents from French sources about space, and to meet officials of the CNES, is to acquire the impression that France tried to help Europe get its space act together; but whenever the latter failed to meet the challenge, France did what it could regardless.
This stems partly from government determination — irrespective of the party in power — to maintain France's commitment to space.
The decision in Cabinet (Conseil Restreint sur l'Espace) in November 1972 to develop the rocket launcher that would subsequently become Ariane was taken several months before the then European space body (the CSE: July 1973) gave its go-ahead.
In 1977, when the European Space Agency decided not to include SPOT among its programmes, the French government nonetheless pressed ahead with the project.
Hence the French pleasure at the sales success of SPOT when the SPOT-I satellite became operational in February 1986.
The Spot Image Corporation has promoted sales of French high-resolution photographs in the US domestic market with the argument that its pictures provide higher quality and better detail than do US Landsat pictures.
During the 1980S France increasingly claimed to be reaping the benefits of French and European space policy decisions taken in the 1973–5 period.
CNES and ESA circles stress that current decisions are heavy with implications for Europe's position 10 to 15 years ahead.
France benefits from the continuity of its space effort, and the high priority given it by governments.
On 20 February 1979 a Cabinet meeting decided on an overhaul of the statutes of the CNES, in order to increase its role and powers, to organize a body that would produce and commercialize the Ariane launcher rockets, and to undertake a new telecommunications satellite programme (Telecom-I).
On 2 October France and West Germany decided on a co-operative direct broadcasting by satellite (DBS) programme involving the construction of TDF-I and TV-SAT.
This year of weighty decisions, 1979, was crowned with the successful launch, on Christmas Eve, of the Ariane rocket (LO-I) from Kourou.
The early success of Ariane (versions I to 4)— four failures in 18 flights underpinned the collective take-off of the European space industry in the 1980S; the first of three Telecom-I satellites became operational in August 1985.
The TDF-I satellite was launched in November 1988: it was to begin transmitting DBS television channels before the end of 1989.
Until 1979, the government assigned to the CNES as its first task the  (French) conquest of space.
CNES non-military research benefited from, and had implications for, Ministry of Defence R&D; in the CNES budget for 1984, for instance, the bulk of the funding of the SPOT programme came via a Ministry of Defence subsidy (258.8 million francs).
With the 1979 reform of the CNES statutes, the objectives assigned to the French space agency laid greater stress on commercial benefits.
CNES developed a series of subsidiary companies, entrusted with commercial applications; Arianespace was formed in March 1980 to produce and sell the Ariane rocket launcher;’ Spot Image was formed in July 1982 to do likewise for data and images transmitted by SPOT; there are several others — including Interspace, CLS (Argos), Simko and Novespace.
The state remains the dominant source of CNES funding, even if changes in the presentation of the CNES accounts since 1985 make this less easy to pinpoint.
During the S the CNES budget increased substantially — largely due to state support for both the national and European (ESA) programmes: the CNES budget (in real terms) trebled in the years 1963–8 and then stayed level during most of the S; in the S it rose steadily.
By the late S the CNES annual budget still hovered just below I billion dollars, but this relatively modest sum represented over 40 per cent of Europe's total expenditure on space.
The European annual total of 2 billion dollars remained around one-tenth of US total space expenditure.
In the field of satellites, Hughes, RCA and Ford still reign supreme; but, thanks to French government backing of CNES R&D and technology in launcher rockets, the Ariane launcher proved adapted to the needs of potential customers at a time when emphasis on the space shuttle led to US neglect of the market for conventional launchers.
CNES promotional literature celebrates the osmosis of French and European space policy.
So do French politicians: ‘it is through Europe that we affirm our presence in space and across the world’, declared President Mitterrand at the Le Bourget aerospace show in June 1987.
In the ‘co-habitation’ period, with power uneasily shared by a socialist President and a conservative Prime Minister (March 1986-May 1988), the continuity of space policy was celebrated as an example of French determination to build on achievements of preceding governments.
However exaggerated the Franco European rhetoric, it is not without foundation: on 11 June 1983 the successful Ariane 16 launch placed in orbit the EUTELSAT telecommunications satellite ECS- 1.
The first of five satellites, relaying both telecommunications traffic and TV relay signals, it became operational in October 1984 and gave Europe (said the 1983 CNES annual report) its independence in the field of telecommunications.
Subsequent Ariane flights placed in orbit telecom satellites for EUTELSAT, France, and other countries: the Ariane V-I launcher that failed in May 1986 was due to place an INTELSAT satellite (VF-14) in orbit.
But the French-European osmosis fails to mask certain policy conundrums and divisions both among the member-countries of ESA, and within French ministries and departments.
In October 1986 a cabinet meeting on space policy, presided over by Prime Minister Jacques Chirac, confirmed France's support for the ESA objective to develop an independent European programme for manned space flights; it authorized the CNES to take up a 45 per cent stake in the preparatory Hermes programme.
On 4 December ESA announced it would begin the preparatory programme.
But in 1987, countries including Germany and Britain cavilled at the combined costs of the three programmes — Ariane 5, Columbus and Hermes.
While the proven track record of the French in launcher rockets caused relatively little objection to the Ariane 5 preparatory programme (where Germany had a 22 per cent stake), the Hermes programme (German 30 per cent stake) was increasingly criticized by both Germany and Britain, which had their own designs for space aeroplanes — Saenger and Hotol.
More advanced than Hermes, these rivals became ever more attractive financially as Hermes, an ‘intermediate technology’, threatened to be delayed from 1995 possibly to 2000.
In November 1987, however, Britain was alone among ESA members in refusing to join in the £13bn projects (Hermes, Columbus, and Ariane 5) related to manned space flights.
A British Trade and Industry Minister, Kenneth Clarke, argued that Hermes (the French-inspired shuttle project) was too costly and that there was no commercial demand for manned space flights.
ESA director general Reimar Luest retorted that US government space spending per person remained more than 10 times the level in Europe, and that space could not be left to private sector R&D: industry talks in terms of 6 or 7 years, whereas in space the returns may take 30 years.
Hermes, however, continues to excite European doubts.
British space policy was in the doghouse.
A report contrasted the British with the French and German records; the UK's fragmented approach had hindered efforts to gain political and technological advantages.
The UK sided with Uncle Sam, in the ‘marked antithesis’ between the European civilian space programme (via ESA) and the US bias of military space projects, in which the UK commonly participates with the Pentagon.’
French space policy has been actively pursued at the level of Prime Minister, Cabinet and President.
On the military side, within the Defence Ministry, the General Delegation for Armament (DGA) overviews arms research, development, production and sales; its research centres (ONERA, the DRET) collaborate with CNES research labs (on the SPOT programme, for example).
Telecom satellites are jointly funded by the DGA and France Télécom.
On the civilian side there are other interests — such as the state research body (CNRS), the telecommunications operator (France Télécom), and the broadcast transmission company (TDF)— in addition to CNES — which want to protect their part of the space turf.
Military interests cluster around the Defence   Ministry and civilian interests focus on the CNES.
Of course, French (and European) companies involved in the space industry (electronics, computing, rocketry-launchers and propulsion, satellites and communication systems) manufacture equipment which may have both military and civilian applications.
CNES spurs the development of the industry and highlights, say, the achievements of Ariane (while military applications of the French space programme are minimized).
Funded by the Posts, Telecoms and) after May 1988 (Space Ministry to the tune of 6 billion francs, CNES is integrated in French telecoms and indeed foreign policy; via ESA, it dominates the space dimension of the Franco-German European partnership (see figures 2.1 and 2.2).
Telecoms operators account for 70 per cent of Ariane's order books in 1989, and French and European orders in early 1989 for 50 new Ariane 4 rockets strengthened Ariane's position as the leading satellite launcher in the world.
Europe, of course, is something of a captive market; not only is ESA funded by 13 European member-states but ESA's procurement policy has been to award contracts in proportion to a country's given contribution to its budget.
For all this, France has played its European cards well.
Furthermore, it has created a community of space technocrats, with sufficient of a scientific and engineering background, to be at ease in both the military and civilian space administrations.
In 1989, for instance, the 53-year-old former ‘polytechnicien’, Yves Sillard, was appointed head of the DGA: he was not yet 30 when, in I 965, the CNES entrusted him with the construction of the Kourou space centre.
He later joined the CNES management, before becoming in 1986 the secretary general of the Eureka committee — the French-inspired project for European co-operation in high technologies.
Sillard exemplifies the career of many successful technocrats, products of a ‘grande école’ who, as we shall see later, are to be found in the audiovisual and broadcasting sectors, as well as in telecommunications and information technology.
The global electronics and communications market
THE ‘globalization’ of world electronics and communications is a much-discussed idea of the late twentieth century.
Certainly there are some dramatic examples.
By the late 1980S Japanese and US companies together supplied some go per cent of the world's semiconductors, supposedly a core technology.
An increasing number of news items, events, or entertainment super-shows can attract audiences of between one and two billion people around the world.
But examples of the stubborn non-emergence of globalization are also plentifully available.
The bigger population nations, where most of the world's population live, are largely self-sufficient in telecommunications services and equipment, in the press, and in most types of radio and television programming.
Nevertheless we accept that a new period in world communications did begin some time in the 1970S — involving technology, markets and policies.
While ‘technological convergence’ and ‘deregulation’were in part publicity slogans and lobbying arguments, these terms also had some empirical substance.
There are many arguments for the uniqueness of the late twentieth-century communications revolution.
One counter-argument is that the communications revolution of the late nineteenth century was no less comprehensive.
1.
The second half of the twentieth century has been an era of free trade in general and since about 1975 of ‘deregulation’ in particular.
But, of course, the late nineteenth century was also an era of free trade.
In both cases global trade experienced inhibitions.
A century ago there were empires whose boundaries were difficult for outside traders to penetrate; now exporters of communications products and services experience difficulties in entering the domestic markets of such large population nations as China, India, USSR, USA, Indonesia, Japan, and Brazil — nations which together have about half the world's people.
2.
The impact of microelectronics in the late twentieth century may have greater claims to uniqueness; distinctive characteristics include easy transportability and economies of scale.
However, space and time barriers also crumbled in the late nineteenth century through the electric telegraph  and the early telephone and radio; moreover the cinema film also featured easy transportability, while its scale economies quickly led to early single nation dominance (by France).
3.
Massive state and military funding of research and development fuelled technological innovation in electronics in the late twentieth century.
But this also occurred with military and imperial funding of the electric telegraph and radio.
4.
The world-wide flow of data now underlies the phenomenon of multinational companies and allows rapid and comprehensive factual updating for all the players in the world economic game.
While again the scale of traffic was much smaller a century ago, the electric telegraph and news agencies already provided rapid updating on stock and commodity prices, as well as news of war and peace.
5.
Japan, the United States and western Europe are generally regarded as the leaders in the present electronics revolution.
Japan in electronics echoes Germany in electrical products a century ago.
But while the United States, France, the UK and Germany still find themselves in similar league positions to a hundred years ago, there is now a growing challenge from a dozen or more previously dependent nations, especially in Asia.
6.
One aspect of the late twentieth-century global market is the penetration of foreign companies into core communications areas, notably into data processing.
IBM and a few other US and Japanese companies provide the electronic means for much administrative and bureaucratic work at the heart of government and management around the world.
This is a remarkable example of dependence, but it follows a century earlier the acceptance — for example in Latin America — of foreign rail operation, which in turn led to foreign-run telephone systems.
7.
Another apparently unique aspect of the current world market is the extraordinary profusion of regulations, standards, rules, laws and policies.
These emerge from many (previously separate (areas of domestic legislation, trade association agreement and international technological diplomacy.
Regional policy-making bodies (especially in western Europe (and agreements between trading nations (such as GATT and OECD (proliferate.
This policy profusion and confusion accompanies frenetic lobbying, negotiating and attempts to look good in the eyes of numerous local and international policy-making groups.
Some of this existed one hundred years ago, albeit on a much smaller scale.
The globalization of all things electronic is still far from complete; and many early examples of electrical revolution existed 100 years ago.
Politically perhaps the biggest change is that a century ago the world economy was dominated by established European and imperial powers and their new rivals (such as the USA and Germany).
While the electric telegraph, early radio, news agencies and film all girdled the world, today the scale and quantity are much greater.
While words could be flashed around the world a century ago, the quantity of data traffic has increased on a scale comparable to the motor traffic increase in the same period.
Instead of the flickering black-and-white images of 1900, there were by 1985 television sets in nearly half the world's households.
The world maps of communication and information a hundred years ago featured ships, metal cables and trains.
Today the routes are much the same but we are switching to satellites, fibre cables and electronic gadgets which combine mouse-like size with mammoth capacity.
GLOBAL FACTORY, GLOBAL MARKET
In most communications markets there are opposing forces of scale economies favouring a ‘global’ approach and political concerns favouring protectionism of vital or infant industries.
An often acceptable compromise is local manufacture or assembly by a multinational company.
But the relative strength of scale economies and political protectionism varies greatly between different communications fields.
In two fields — telecommunications and media — self-sufficiency and protectionism predominate.
In telecommunications the divestiture of AT&T, effective in January 1984, opened the US equipment market — but the main ‘foreign’ success has been Northern Telecom, a company which is legally Canadian.
The Japanese and European markets continued to be largely controlled by traditional champions, due to the still-continuing buying monopolies.
In the media foreign incursions were confined largely to cinema films and TV entertainment series.
Ownership incursions have remained fairly small.
Nevertheless the success of Murdoch's News Corporation attracts would-be imitators.
News in 1988 took 42 per cent of revenue from the USA, 28 per cent from the UK, and 30 per cent from Australia and the Pacific.
In several fields Japanese leadership has clearly emerged, notably in consumer electronics and the heavy electrical fields.
Japan dominates audio and video consumer electronics.
By 1985, for example, Japan was making about 60 per cent of the total world output of colour television tubes.
Philips made 24 per cent and the ‘rest’ made only 14 per cent.
Japan established even greater dominance in the video cassette recorder market in the early 1980S, quickly turning in 1984–5 to production within the USA and EC.
This performance was built upon an earlier and continuing export strength in radios and audio equipment of all kinds.
Areas of continuing American dominance included aerospace, defence electronics and computing.
In aerospace the American dominance requires little comment — it obtains in both aviation and space, both civil and military.
It  is equally strong in major sub-areas such as aero engines.
The only significant competition comes from much smaller European co-operative efforts, such as Ariane and Airbus.
Another major area of United States dominance has been the computer industry, on which more shortly.
Some areas are about equally balanced.
These include robotics/computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacture and the semiconductor business.
In the latter Japan became dominant in the mass market during the 1980S.
Despite these differences, communications markets tend to be extreme examples of economies of scale, for a number of common reasons: The high research and development cost, as much as $1 billion or even $2 billion — for a new ‘generation’ of telephone exchanges or computers — operates as a membership fee to a small and diminishing group of corporate players.
The cost of a new plant — to build for example two million TV tubes per year — is high.
The complexity of the technology most notably in chips — increases literally from one year to the next.
Prices of electronic components have fallen dramatically — this again usually is only possible with large scale in sales.
The truism that ‘niche markets don't stay that way’ makes for a restless search for new niches.
There are uncertainties about adequate scale and revenue, and the consummation of ever-larger mergers .
Mergers between giants such as GE and RCA (1985) and between Sperry and Burroughs (1986) inevitably forced smaller competitors also to consider growing by merger; 1987 duly saw the start of a fresh wave of European electronics mergers.
These factors led to a pattern of ‘top-ten’ thinking It is repeatedly stated that in each major industry sector — and in the world electronics industry itself — only ten or so world players will survive.
This in turn seems to indicate about three surviving ‘European’ players.
As corporate players recognize other players adopting this assumption, an element of self-fulfilling prophecy takes charge.
Enormous emphasis comes to be placed on developing major new technologies and products — as the means of ensuring a company's future, of developing new markets, and of achieving high profit levels.
Some of the large successful companies are national champions of the larger nations.
Perhaps the classic European example is Siemens, the West German electronics giant.
Siemens in turn is (along with Ericsson and ITT) one of three companies which have traditionally supplied telecommunications equipment on a favoured, semi-sheltered, basis in many national markets.
The characteristics of electronics production and marketing seem to demand companies which can combine scale economies with quick-footed innovation.
Companies need to be both big and quick, or to get big quickly.
The United States has special advantages in the size of its domestic market.
As table 3.1 indicates, over half of the world's largest electronics and communications companies are American.
But of the 20 US companies in the table, five are telecommunications carriers, five are aerospace and defence electronics   specialists, and four are computer companies.
Only two (GE and Westinghouse) are general electronics companies.
The Japanese electronics industry is quite different.
Competition is mainly between a small number of large companies, each of which operates across a broad range; NEC, Hitachi, Toshiba, and Matsushita are companies of this general electronics type — they are vertically integrated, manufacturing the microelectronic components for their own end products.
Much has been said and written as to how exactly the miracle is  performed, but it is widely agreed that a relatively stable group of large general electronics companies in Japan did succeed in the 1970S and 1980S in being continuously innovative in terms of products and markets.
We now briefly mention four other aspects of the global market —cost-price peculiarities, offshore assembly, surplus capacity and 'alliance portfolios'.
One of the key articles of faith in United States deregulation was that ‘prices should move towards costs’.
This general argument was in the interests of large users of telecommunications who thought they were subsidizing small and local users.
But while international and long-distance tariffs have been reduced especially in the USA and Britain — the gap between costs and prices remains massive; the price charged by Intelsat for the transocean telephone call from Paris or London to New York is multiplied by something like ten times when the customer is billed.
Nor is this confined to telecommunications.
In both communications products and services massive scale economies tend to mean that the marginal cost of serving an additional customer is either nil or small.
Consequently very different prices can be and are charged for the same or similar things.
In renting a movie a national (monopoly (TV channel may only pay as much per showing as one major cinema in the same country pays for a week.
Big computers often achieve huge profit levels; ‘clones’ of IBM computers may deliver more computing power for a significantly lower price.
Also widespread in information technology is the manufacturing ‘learning curve’ which leads to radical efficiency improvements and ‘free-fall’pricing.
Related to these price-cost peculiarities is the phenomenon of offshore manufacture .
For microelectronics products transportation costs are minimal, labour accounts for a high proportion of total costs, and radically cheaper labour is available in foreign countries.
Hence the tendency of United States companies since the early 1960S) and Japanese companies especially in the 1970S (to manufacture in Mexico or Southeast Asia.
As labour costs or political conditions change, the work can easily be switched.
Another common characteristic of global communications is the tendency towards excess capacity .
Smaller producers complain that the big players deliberately over-expand capacity in order to cause a ‘shake-out’ of the competition.
The response is that in a rapidly growing market (say 30 per cent growth per annum) the only way to increase market share is to go for massive expansion of capacity (say 50 per cent per annum ).
These markets are subject to both expansion and contraction.
For example in 1984 the world semiconductor market grew by nearly 50 per cent, but 1985 was a disaster, or shake-out, year; 1988 as another year of huge growth.
IBM in several years in the 1980S prepared for big sales increases, which — despite price cuts — did not occur.
In telecommunications the twin-track development of satellite and fibre-optic capacity — not least across the north Atlantic and north Pacific — suggests major over-capacity for the 1990S.
One response to these various forms of volatility is the alliance portfolio (in J.Arlandis's term).
By making a number of corporate alliances a company may also seek to solve the ‘big and quick’ problem — alliances often feature a corporate giant like IBM in alliance with, say, a small innovative specialist in some particular type of software.
Another reason for developing the alliance portfolio is the need to broaden the product range offered to customers.
Apart from marriages between the big and the quick there are many other types of alliances.
Some focus on a particular joint-venture subsidiary company; some involve the sharing of research and development; some are an alliance of production capacity with marketing strength; some involve putting a foreign product under a domestic label; some alliances are intended to promote a new standard or form of compatibility (and to defeat a rival standard).
An important aspect of alliances — like alliances in international politics — is that they frequently are between highly unequal partners.
Many alliances are between small European companies and much larger US or Japanese companies.
While alliances are intended to reduce insecurity and volatility, they are also designed to increase the pressure on competitors.
Thus alliances are yet another characteristic, not unique to — but prominent within — the communications industries, which contributes to commercial volatility.
THE UNITED STATES AND JAPAN VERSUS EUROPE
As seen from the United States both Japan and western Europe welcomed the American deregulatory tide of 1975 onwards as offering a freer flow into the US market.
As seen from Japan, United States strength remains formidable in several fields, not least in aerospace and computers.
But Europeans increasingly during the I 1980s came to see the global electronics market as offering key advantages to the United States and Japan.
In particular, in European eyes, the resurgence of Japan was partly based on ‘unfair’ advantages.
Japan had allowed the United States largely to provide and pay for its defence.
Japan lived off other nations' research and development, and, in practice, subsidized exports while protecting against imports.
European critiques of the United States could be equally severe.
United States defence spending has been a key driving force behind much of the electronics, telecommunications and computer industries.
The US military space and intelligence agencies — as well as the civilian federal government had not merely been the key early purchasers of computers.
The military funded computer languages (like COBOL and ADA), networking systems (like Ethernet), and advanced computing research at MIT, Stanford and Yale, among other universities.
To European eyes United States communications policy seemed dominated by the Department of Defense.
It was this Washington Department which  enforced the restrictions on strategic exports to the Soviet Union and its friends.
Some Europeans saw these policies as designed to subjugate the computer industries, not only of eastern Europe, but of western Europe as well.
In this perspective also President Reagan's ‘Strategic Defense Initiative’ was more than a Star Wars nuclear strategy; SDI was also seen as yet another way of pumping more billions of government dollars into advanced research, much of it related to information technology.
Plenty of criticisms were also made of Europe by the United States and Japan.
The Europeans in general, it was said, and in particular anything connected with telecommunications, aerospace or France, tended to take the bad old form of state monopoly and protected or sheltered markets.
Increasingly in the 1980S the western Europeans started to establish cooperative projects — especially in the areas of standards and research — intended to reduce European fragmentation and waste.
Americans condemned such cooperative efforts — which the Europeans thought of as merely copying Japanese and American co-operation — as additional and unjustified protectionism.
In the 1980S the west Europeans came to regard the United States and Japan as linked not merely via the alliance portfolios of companies, but via a series of tacit and formal agreements at industry and government level.
The 1986 Semiconductor Trade Agreement exemplified strategic electronic co-operation between Japan and the USA.
The Agreement gave some legitimacy to US criticism of both dumping in the US market and protectionism in the Japanese market; but the Agreement was designed solely to settle differences between two nations controlling some go per cent of the non-communist world market for semiconductors.
As such it was certain to be seen as a global cartel, and it was in fact denounced by individual European governments and the EC Commission as being in contravention of GATT.
EUROPEAN ELECTRONICS CHAMPIONS VERSUS USA AND JAPAN
Let us briefly note the dilemmas facing the electronics champions of Germany, France, Britain and The Netherlands.
Britain's GEC (see table 3.1 (was the smallest of these national champions.
Its activities were largely focused on telecommunications, the heavy electrical sector and on defence electronics and avionics.
Its most obvious difficulties have been lack of scale and disappointing growth.
The German Siemens was in a stronger position in several ways; in addition to its computer and telecommunications equipment strengths, Siemens in the late 1980S was attempting to catch up with the vertically integrated Japanese electronics companies; it was making a major chip effort, with use by the German car industry especially in mind.
Philips had a dominant world position in lighting; but elsewhere — in components and in consumer electronics — Philips, more than any other European company, faced the full blast of vertically integrated Japanese competition.
Philips — like Siemens and GEC — attempted to evolve rather than to make radical changes of direction.
But the two French champions, CGE and Thomson, both pursued radical policies of high profile and high risk.
Each company in the 1980S engaged in a lengthy series of company purchases and sales; each company made one especially large purchase from a United States giant.
CGE-Alcatel decided to specialize in telecommunications equipment and in 1986 acquired control of the European telecoms equipment activities of the American ITT company.
Meanwhile Thomson, after a hectic series of company deals, had by the late 1980S focused on two major fields — defence and professional electronics, and on consumer electronics.
In 1987 Thomson sold GE-RCA its medical electronics operation and purchased GE-RCA's television manufacturing activities, thus giving Thomson immediate leadership of the US television set market; Thomson was also second (to GM-Hughes (in the world  defence electronics league.
Both of these French strategies illustrated a common belief in the need to move quickly and to be big in a few global market sectors.
Such strategies are obviously high in risk.
But while both cases are examples of French risk-taking they are also dramatic examples of large United States companies withdrawing from major electronics fields — namely the European telecommunications equipment market and the US domestic television set market.
IBM VERSUS THE REST
As with most other new communications industries in the twentieth century, the United States quickly established a huge computer lead over the rest of the world.
The computer industry also conformed to a common American pattern of running into anti-trust difficulties — following IBM's overwhelmingly successful System/360 offerings of the early 1960S.
This was an integrated family of large computers with related software which would allow for convenient upgrading.
It led to the famous ‘software lock-in’, which meant that IBM's customers had massive financial incentives to remain IBM customers.
System/360 locked in many customers in Europe as well; the British and German IBMs also made major research and development contributions to the 360.
The early 1960S to the early 1980S were two decades of IBM dominance.
The main competition to IBM came from a group of other US mainframe producers, often referred to as the ‘seven dwarfs’ or the Bunch.
The B was for Burroughs and the H was for Honeywell — and such US companies were slowly  falling further behind IBM.
This became especially apparent when the US Department of Justice dropped its anti-trust case against IBM in January 1982.
IBM was waiting for this decision and quickly became more aggressive at home and abroad.
The mid-1980s saw IBM apparently making all the right decisions.
Most remarkable was its late, but spectacularly successful, entry to the baby computer, or microcomputer, business.
IBM also seemed able to combine huge scale with flexibility and quick-footedness in a number of directions.
IBM moved towards sales rather than renting; it placed greater emphasis on software; it invested massively in automated factories.
IBM also moved into new fields through various alliances with small insurgent innovators.
It entered the company telephone switch business (PABX) by buying Rolm.
It used a then unknown company called Microsoft for its personal computer (PC) operating system.
IBM also strengthened its position in the booming peripherals sector; it developed various different networking systems.
IBM had been a pioneer of the global factory.
In major foreign markets Japan, Germany, France and Britain — the policy was to go native to the extent of roughly matching local production and local sales.
IBM mainframes were made in three locations in the world — Poughkeepsie in New York State, Yasu in Japan and Montpellier in France:
By 1984 IBM had fifteen factories in Europe (two in England, one in Sweden, one in Holland, four in Germany, four in France, two in Italy and one in Spain).
Each had a precise role.
For example, the factory at Montpellier manufactured all the computers at the top range and these were delivered to every country in Europe, the Middle East and Africa.
This did not mean that this factory produced every single component used in the computers.
Certain semi-conductors came from the factories at Corbeil-Essonnes in France, from Sindelfingen in Germany, or were bought from external suppliers.
The  memory-discs connected to these computers came from the factory in Mainz, West Germany, and the printers from the factory at Jarfalla in Sweden.
The PC was manufactured in Greenock, Scotland.'
In the mid-1980s IBM was still also setting de facto industry standards.
The main way to compete with IBM was to adopt IBM technical standards and also to a greater or lesser extent to copy the relevant IBM machine, thus ensuring that most old software could be used and that the bulk of new software was also compatible.
Japanese mainframe makers pursued this ‘IBM-compatible’ strategy, as did many entrants to the micro-business, from Silicon Valley to South Korea, by producing ‘IBM clones’.
In 1984 IBM had its most successful year; but in the middle and late 1980S the company certainly faced a different competitive situation.
It faced three groupings of competitors across the world and members of each grouping were reorganizing.
Firstly the United States competition was changing from the old Bunch to a new collection of competitors targeted more at specific markets.
Two of the old Bunch (Burroughs and Sperry) merged into Unisys; Digital Equipment (DEC) and Hewlett-Packard provided increasingly severe competition in the minicomputer range and as the main beneficiaries of ‘down-sizing’(in effect producing mainframe-level computer power on a much smaller and cheaper machine).
IBM also found itself confronting new alliances, such as DEC and Apple.
Secondly IBM found itself facing a steadily growing Japanese challenge, especially from Fujitsu, NEC and Hitachi — all three of which companies were in the first six in the world league for mainframes and for data processing overall.
Thirdly, the western European computer industry was also staging a mild recovery.
Olivetti (Italy), Bull (France) and STC-ICL (Britain) were showing modest success compared at least with the disasters earlier in the 1980S.
Europe had three companies in Datamation's 1988 top twelve — Siemens, Olivetti and Bull.
These European companies were benefiting from global alliance strategies.
Siemens and STC-ICL had mainframe alliances with Fujitsu; Bull of France had a three-way alliance with Honeywell and NEC of Japan.
Olivetti of Italy was still partly owned by AT&T.
From 1984 onwards IBM increasingly faced not only a series of alliances, but a grand alliance of nearly all other computer companies in the world.
The grand alliance favoured a new set of standards called open systems interconnection (OSI), which was intended to allow all types of computer in the world to talk to each other within any kind of network.
OSI was established as a direct rival to IBM's systems network architecture (SNA (which was intended to allow all IBM machines to talk to each other, while locking out non-SNA equipment.
The grand alliance of OSI became public in May 1985 when a meeting of 20  computer companies, dominated by US rivals of IBM, met in conference and established the Corporation for Open Systems.
The OSI, which they adopted, had been pioneered by several international bodies; the initial work began in 1977 at the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) on developing a seven-layer OSI reference model.
Also involved subsequently was the CCITT (a Geneva-based wing of the ITU) which sets world telecommunications standards.
From 1983 onwards nearly everyone in the computer world jumped aboard the OSI standards bandwagon.
OSI was the creation of the world standards bodies.
It quickly attracted the support of the major western European computer companies, which — along with the European telecommunication authorities — had been its major proponents.
OSI would also be important for ISDN, the multi-purpose digital networks of the future, and this also lay behind AT&T enthusiasm.
The big American computer users — such as Boeing and General Motors — which had been pioneers of intra-company networks, were also natural supporters of OSI.
Thus the arrival of the major US computer companies in mid-1985 consolidated an anti-IBM grand alliance which had begun in Europe and now included all the other leading computer companies of the western world, all the telecommunications authorities and government regulators, and all of the pioneering computer-user companies.
IBM saw the way things were going and by 1984 was itself already moving towards OSI.
By 1987 IBM was ready, along with the other US companies, to embrace OSI.
Indeed IBM was ready with a fulsome endorsement of OSI, pointing out that it was already developing OSI software in both Europe and California; OSI research was already under way at IBM's European Networking Center at Heidelberg, and various IBM products already supported the first five of OSI's seven layers.
IBM had indeed been making OSI product announcements since summer 1985, as had its rivals, notably DEC.
The great standards war between IBM's SNA and the rest of the world's OSI seemed to be over; SNA — claimed IBM — would be merged into OSI.
Indeed the next major standards battle, in 1987–8, featured IBM (allied with DEC and Hewlett-Packard) opposed to AT&T (allied with Unisys and NCR) and a new version of the Unix operating system developed by Sun Microsystems.
Clearly there will be many standards skirmishes, but has IBM lost the standards war?
IBM has faced stronger competition in a number of areas.
IBM also finds itself at the wrong end of several historical trends.
Smaller computers and software are less suitable for single-company domination than were hardware and mainframes.
But some other trends probably favour IBM — the trends towards networking and services offer new opportunities.
However, from the point of view of Europe and the rest of the world, the fate of IBM in the 199OS may be irrelevant.
Whatever happens to IBM, the world  and European computer markets seem likely still to be dominated by the United States and Japan.
The Japanese are strong in mainframes and, of course, in semiconductors.
The USA and IBM continue to lead at all levels — in supercomputers, in mainframes, in minis, and in micros (IBM and Apple).
Even if IBM has a relatively weak market share in the burgeoning software business it is still very comfortably number one; and while some of the Japanese giants and European champions occupy high positions in the software league, the huge array of US software insurgents (led by such companies as Lotus, Microsoft and Sun) has no equivalent elsewhere.
While Japan has some half-a-dozen important computer companies, the European nations tend each to have one lonely champion (the Germans have two — Siemens and Nixdorf).
The rise of Japan on the world computer scene is illustrated by the history of Fujitsu, which at its foundation in 1935 used telecommunications technical assistance from Siemens.
Fifty years later Fujitsu was well established as a supplier to Siemens of mainframe computers.
One of the American complaints against Japan is that Japan has had access to US government-funded research while denying foreign companies access to research funded by the Japanese government.
A change was, however, made in 1985 for one non-Japanese computer company; IBM, long one of the big four computer companies in Japan, was the foreign company granted this privilege.
IBM and the relevant Japanese ministry could argue that IBM had in practice earned ‘domestic’ status.
But viewed from Europe this could easily be seen as yet another example of a US-Japan alliance designed to maintain the status quo of world computer dominance.
IBM VERSUS EUROPE
In summer 1984 the Commission of the EC agreed to suspend legal proceedings against IBM in return for the following main concessions:
1.
IBM is now required to provide technical specifications and instructions on all new 370-series products within 4 months of announcement.
2.
IBM's European customers are no longer required to buy bundled or predetermined amounts of main memory when purchasing a mainframe, thus giving rivals a chance to sell into that market.
3.
IBM promises to quicken the pace of publishing technical details on its systems network architecture (SNA (protocols.
4.
IBM must continue its efforts to match SNA to the International Standards Organization/open systems interconnection (OSI (standard adopted by many European companies already.
This summary is from the American trade paper,Computerworld , which, like  most other US commentators, dismissed the EC's claim that IBM's concessions were significant.
The case seemed at the time, and in retrospect, to be a win for IBM.
The technical information disclosure requirement was in fact not much different from normal IBM practice.
The requirement against memory ‘bundling’ had been important when the EC first looked at the complaints back in 1977; but in the period 1977–84 memory prices dropped so steeply as to make the point relatively trivial.
The key to the agreement lies in the two SNA/OSI standards points.
In effect the European computer industry had already by summer 1984 obtained IBM's agreement to the OSI requirement and this — not anti-monopoly — was now Europe's chosen route.
The EC-IBM 1984 agreement was also dated in that it applied only to mainframes (specifically the IBM 370 series and successors (which were now of less than their previous dominant significance.
The case had indeed been brought by Burroughs (US (and Amdahl (US-Japan (— neither of them a European company.
Strictly speaking therefore this was not an IBM versus Europe case but an IBM versus US/Japan case.
The same complainant companies had in fact been involved in an earlier domestic US anti-trust case against IBM.
IBM had 65 per cent of a total west European mainframe market of $5.3 billion (in 1983).
Four other US companies (including Amdahl and Burroughs) had another 17 per cent; the two largest European mainframers were Siemens (7 per cent ) and Bull (4 per cent ).
IBM had a roughly two-thirds share of the combined mainframe market in France, West Germany and Britain.
IBM's share of ‘medium systems’ was around a quarter.
Its share of ‘small systems’ was only about 15 per cent, but due to grow.
IBM's overall market share in each main national computer market in Europe was around one-third.
IBM's negotiators stressed this point; indeed it was the combined IBM/other US/Japanese share of around two-thirds which was the real problem.
A strong IBM theme was that any attempt to penalize IBM would simply lead to an increased Japanese market share.
IBM emphasized its record as a good corporate citizen in Europe, employing 100,000 Europeans, paying $ 1 billion in local taxes, and investing another $1 billion in new plant in Europe in 1983.
Ninety per cent of IBM equipment sold in Europe was also manufactured in Europe.
While stressing IBM good behaviour, IBM chairman John Opel in a speech in London in May 1984 told Europeans that IBM could always take its investment elsewhere.
IBM lawyers had an impressive record in winning anti-trust cases; and IBM's general counsel Nicholas Katzenbach (a former US Attorney-General) maintained that winning record in this case.
The negotiations also had some typical Brussels features; the talks came to a climax as everyone in Brussels was due to depart on August vacations — and the late-night negotiations led to final announcements on 2 August 1984.
IBM probably won the case not in Brussels but in Bonn, Paris and Rome.
IBM is famous for its attention to detail and not least in the art of political lobbying in key capital cities.
IBM's European HQ was based in Paris and a Frenchman, Jacques Maisonrouge, has been IBM's most elevated non American citizen.
IBM's main manufacturing base in Europe was West Germany, a fact which was doubtless emphasized at the time in Bonn.
In London IBM had, according to one journalist, ‘come pretty close to perfecting the art of understanding British politics’ in addition to spending a lot of time ‘explaining technical aspects of information technology’to British civil servants.
IBM had also become very friendly with the telecommunications providers, especially the German Bundespost and British Telecom.
These telecoms authorities apparently regarded IBM as members of their purchasing club for computers.
Indeed western European governments in general seemed to take the same view.
Government computer purchases in Europe were in the early 1980S supposedly opened up by EC rules to a free market.
In practice governments typically split their major computer purchases between IBM and one other computer company.
In the larger nations in the 1980S IBM in effect became the second national champion, and in some smaller countries perhaps even the first national champion computer supplier.
DATA NETWORKS AND TRANSBORDER DATA PIPELINES
Transborder data flow is a somewhat outdated term; but TBDF increased rapidly in the 1980S and is likely to increase dramatically through the 1990S.
Major growth areas of TBDF in the 1970S included international airline systems (for seat reservations and related information), and international credit card networks.
The growth is likely to continue for at least two reasons.
Firstly TBDFs are basically an extension across borders of a phenomenon which in the 1980S expanded dramatically at national level.
Secondly the lowering of trans-ocean communications tariffs may make global data pipelines nearly as cheap to operate as national networks.
Both national networks and international pipelines for data focus heavily on intra-company, intra-organizational, or intra-industry, communications.
Most of the early developments occurred within the United States.
In addition to national airlines, early users were big organizations which had to keep track of many internal operations such as many components, many spare parts or large dealer/point-of-sale networks.
Early major users of value-added networks included the US military, aerospace companies such as Boeing (with its numerous suppliers), the petrochemical industry, and the car industry.
General Motors used the services of a major networking company — Electronic Data  Systems (EDS)— which it later purchased.
GM-EDS had two major areas to handle.
They needed to co-ordinate thousands of manufacturing operations in GM's plants scattered across the USA; and secondly they needed a system to control the supplying of its dealer network with vehicles and spare parts.
During the 1980s data networks of various kinds were spreading to more and more United States companies and industries; several factors encouraged this, not least the deregulation of telecommunications and the emergence of new software packages tailored to particular industries' networking needs.
Lagging behind the USA, a similar expansion of networks occurred in Japan, Britain and France.
This expansion was closely related to the degree of telecommunications deregulation.
In 1986 the European market for value-added network services was worth $900 million — with over 60 per cent of this in the two most deregulated larger markets, Britain and France, and only 16 per cent in West Germany and Italy combined.’
Transborder data flow is essentially the same thing-a value-added network (or a managed data network) which extends the intra-organizational network to foreign branches, subsidiaries or other locations.
By 1985 GM-EDS was developing such networks in Britain, Germany and elsewhere in Europe; it was incorporating pre-existing operations in its Vauxhall and Opel subsidiaries and also took over a Unilever system.
GM-EDS then offered its network for use by other companies.
Data networks and their likely continued rapid expansion have played a significant part in US government policy on international trade.
The US government has long argued forcefully that GATT free trade rules should apply to all services; and in 1985, after three years of negotiation, the US position was incorporated nearly intact into OECD's Declaration on Transborder Data Flows.
United States trade associations such as CBEMA (hardware) and ADAPSO (software) and others had worried that some foreign nations might impose usage-related charges on data transmission; West Germany was suspect in this regard.
France had been the western European nation most opposed to American concepts of data free flow.
Britain, Switzerland, Belgium, The Netherlands, Sweden (all locations of multinationals and major banks) and the other Scandinavian countries have been closest to the US position.’
DEREGULATING TELECOMMUNICATIONS: EUROPE LEARNS FROM US MISTAKES?
The break-up into eight companies of the dominant United States telephone organization — AT&T or ‘Ma Bell’— was the most important event in world telecommunications in the 1980S.
Announced in January 1982, and finally put into effect two years later, the AT&T break-up startled the telecommunications  world in general and not least the western European state monopoly telephone administrations.
But western Europe did not follow the United States' example by radical moves in a commercial or competitive direction.
The Europeans, indeed, observed that AT&T only accepted the divestiture after a decade of mounting criticism from Congress, the courts, and the big telephone users.
The British and Japanese went for much more cautious moves in a deregulatory direction.
Most western European governments decided to hang on to the state monopoly in telecommunications networks; their deregulatory ventures were to be very modest indeed — for example in allowing greater flexibility in renting or buying telephone handsets and other terminal equipment.
The loose political consensus in the United States which produced the AT&T break-up of 1982–4 also hoped to encourage telephone deregulation in the rest of the world; the AT&T high command were especially eager to enter both the computer business and the world market for telephone equipment.
But during the 1980S these policies and plans made fairly little progress.
The rest of the world's telecoms deregulatory efforts were half-hearted at most.
Moreover AT&T made only modest progress in entering the computer business and the world telecoms equipment market.
Despite joint ventures in Europe with Philips and Olivetti, and in Spain, AT&T did not successfully achieve the same status as the existing ‘foreign legion’ telecoms equipment suppliers; Siemens of Germany and Ericsson continued their traditional success as equipment suppliers in many countries, and ITT largely held on to its foreign markets both under its US ownership and when it came under majority French (Alcatel) control in 1986.
What happened in the 1980S was that, with the partial exceptions of Britain and Japan, nearly all governments held on to monopoly state control of the telephone network and also largely stuck to their traditional club of equipment suppliers; consequently AT&T had little foreign success in its chosen strengths of network provision and major equipment items.
Such relaxation of state monopoly control of telecommunications as occurred was mainly in ‘communications’ areas lying between telecoms and computers.
Some changes in a competitive direction occurred in value-added networks (VANs), terminals, private branch exchanges (PBXs) and local area networks (LANs); these were mainly intra-company communications areas where IBM was already strongly positioned in terms of products, services and existing customers.
Thus it tended to be IBM (and its US competitors such as DEC (— and not AT&T — which mainly benefited from Europe's modest attempts at telecoms deregulation.
The events of the 1980S did little to shake the positions of the world's major telecommunications players.
In the USA there were some incursions but primarily by existing US and Canadian companies such as MCI and Northern Telecom; Ma Bell's difficult times were matched by the buoyant profits of her  seven regional offspring.
The European national club monopolists — like Siemens, Ericsson and ITT-Alcatel — stayed in much the same positions.
The divorce of mail and telephone (of which Sweden had long been the main example (at last in the 1980S became widespread.
The state networks received more capital investment.
European nations' telecoms continued to depend on a consensual grouping of a few powerful interests.
On the one hand there was the central government and its economic (and taxation (plans which laid down broad policy and investment strategy; on the other hand was the ‘club’ of often just two traditional suppliers of equipment.
In the centre of this grouping was the telephone administration itself; its exact status varied between countries from being within a central government Department (as in France (to being a partly state-owned commercial company (Italy and Spain).
Regardless of its exact status the telephone administration was itself largely responsible for setting technical standards, negotiating with international authorities and regulating many details of equipment and services.
All of the European telephone administrations made broadly similar engineering, monopoly, and public service assumptions.
In 1987 the Commission of the European Community produced its Green Paper on Telecommunications, this was in effect a continuation of the policies already emerging in France and Germany.
The EC favoured further opening up of the customer equipment market; a separation of the regulatory and operational functions of the telephone authority; a more cost-oriented pricing of services; the major network and a small number of basic services would remain the monopoly of the telecoms administration.
The most controversial item in this low-key list was the establishment of a competitive VAN sector; but even this was already under way in France and well advanced in Britain.
Alongside the EC Green Paper there could be listed a substantial number of ‘European’ initiatives.
There was already much co-operation between the European telecoms authorities, especially on standards.
But there were also major new schemes involving Digital telecommunications, for example the ISDN and a 1987 agreement to ensure that cellular mobile radio (car telephones (would move to a common European digital standard.
But perhaps the biggest change in Europe in the late 1980S occurred amongst the national ‘champion’ suppliers of telecommunications equipment.
During the 1980S it was increasingly argued that the world market could not support more than ten suppliers of major equipment items (such as central office or exchange equipment) and that Europe's ten or more manufacturers would need to slim down to, at most four, perhaps three.
In a series of changes, especially in 1986–7, a slimming-down from about ten to about five did occur.
West Germany (with Siemens) and Sweden (with Ericsson) each already had only one major company.
In quick succession France slimmed down from three to one and Italy from two to one; Britain also finally slimmed down to one  company from two and previously three.
This left western Europe with just five significant equipment suppliers — one each from France, Britain, Germany, Italy and Sweden.
Then in 1988–9 AT&T at last achieved major success, in effect eliminating from the world league both one major US telecoms equipment maker (GTE (and the main Italian equipment maker (AT&T joint venture with Italtel).
Now there were only six significant equipment makers in North America and western Europe.
Whether or not these arrangements will become truly competitive across Europe and beyond will be decided in the 1990S; but clearly there was a powerful element here (at the level of the four largest countries (of de facto monopoly.
This continuation (or even increase ) in commercial monopoly and duopoly in equipment supply of course went alongside the continuing monopoly of the core telephone network.
Telecommunications policy became more controversial in the 1980S as it came to feature on the political agendas of each nation and of Europe, or Europes.
Telecommunications represented, at least in the 1980S, the major example of a traditional state monopoly which, faced with the possibility of external competition, succeeded in defending, even consolidating, both national dominance and European control.
SEMICONDUCTOR CHIPS: US AND JAPANESE DOMINANCE
Unlike the state monopoly telecommunications business which has tended to stay that way, the semiconductor chip business started out with United States commercial dominance; it has continued on this pattern, with the one major change that in the 1980S the multinational companies dominating the world chip business ceased to be predominantly American and became a combination of Japanese and United States companies.
Franco Malerba has published a detailed account of how Europe fell behind in the semiconductor business.
During the 1950S the United States established a lead in transistors and then in early integrated circuits.
Public procurement and especially defence procurement led to a double demand for semiconductors, which were used directly (for example in military missiles (and which were also in heavy demand from the computer industry (for defence and other federal government use).
This new technology opened the way via federal contracts for new specialized ‘merchant’ producers such as Texas Instruments and Fairchild.
The United States established a major lead over both Japan and Europe.
In the 1960S the US semiconductor business penetrated the European market and achieved dominance.
In Japan, however, government policy avoided this outcome; the Japanese market was protected and in due course the world semiconductor market was targeted for a concerted Japanese effort.
Semiconductor industry top ten tables show the Japanese industry apparently taking over leadership from the USA around 1985.
Such tables show NEC, Hitachi and Toshiba occupying three of the top five slots from 1985, and Japanese companies occupying six of the top ten world chip league places in 1987 and 1988.
The Japanese companies are mainly multi-product electronics giants, while the American companies have tended towards the specialist ‘merchant’ model — Texas Instruments, Motorola and Intel.
Therein lies an anomaly.
Such league tables do not usually show the production for own use by the American super-companies.
Both IBM and AT&T are major producers of semiconductors for their own manufacturing use.
Other American production for defence — including military space — is also not included in league tables.
However, even despite such ‘captive’ production, the decline of the dollar probably meant that in 1987 Japan did finally and unambiguously pass the United States in world chip production.
Initially Japanese production was heavily focused on the cheap mass production of basic chips, but then followed the familiar progression up-market.
In the field of application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) Japan had eight of the top ten world market positions by 1987.
During the 1980S the United States and Japanese companies together continued to produce 85 or go per cent of the non-communist world's chips.
Western Europe produced around 10 per cent throughout this period, and the rest of the world only some 3 per cent.
Increasingly first American and then Japanese companies produced abroad, especially in Europe (tables 3.3 and 3.4).
Texas Instruments, the American merchant producer, made its first overseas chip production investment in 1957; it chose the United Kingdom because at that time the UK represented the most favourable military and computer market outside the United States.
Texas Instruments plants in France, West Germany, Italy and Japan followed in the 1960S.
Motorola, and later several Japanese companies followed a similar pattern.
In western Europe West Germany in the 1980S became the biggest producer of chips Much of this was captive production for Siemens, IBM and Japanese companies.
French and British policies were quite similar in favouring ‘high-end’ and semi-custom chip production which was supported by government-assisted R&D and mergers, and by government purchasing.
The second strand of policy was to encourage multinationals to use France and Britain as production bases; this latter aspect of policy seems to have been the more successful strand.
The European microelectronics picture was somewhat modified by the parallel decisions of three European champions (discussed above) to reemphasize vertical integration.
Philips and Siemens, as well as Thomson's Italian co-venture company, SGS-Thomson, all focused their attention on an increased effort in chip R&D and production.
These three companies, all believing in the need to maintain a strong components capability, in 1988 formed the $3.3 billion JESSI (Joint European Submicron Silicon Initiative) co-operative research and development programme.
The fact that only three west European companies were prepared to make a major commitment in such a key area was one more indication of how global the electronics industry had become.
THE 1990S: TOWARDS THREE EUROPEAN COMPANIES?
Partly in anticipation of a tariff-free economic community in 1992, European electronics experienced, at the very end of the 1980S, a further quickening of the concentration and merger trends.
The emerging pattern seemed to be of each main electronic and electrical sector being left with about three major companies.
Europe had only two large general electronics companies — Siemens and  Philips (see table 3.2).
In telecommunications equipment the three leaders were Siemens, CGE-Alcatel (France (and Ericsson (Sweden).
In consumer electronics the European leaders were Philips/Grundig and Thomson.
Thomson was Europe's biggest defence electronics contractor with the other defence leaders being Daimler-Benz/MBB and British Aerospace.
In microprocessors the only European producers of any scale were Philips, Siemens and SGS/Thomson.
One very obvious aspect of this list is the overall dominance of Germany (mainly Siemens), France (Thomson and CGE-Alcatel) and The Netherlands (Philips).
By the end of the 1980S most of the large European companies were explicitly following the mid-1980s French policy of aiming to join a small league of world players.
In winter 1988–9 Siemens purchased IBM's PBX subsidiary to become the largest PBX supplier in the domestic US market; Siemens also joined the British GEC bid to purchase Plessey.
There were many other large new deals, mergers and alliances both within nations and across national boundaries.
Meanwhile the Japanese electronics companies continued to grow and they showed an urgent interest in building plants inside the EC.
At the same time the largest American electronics companies also exhibited increased competitive energy in anticipation of a tariff-free western Europe.
One third of IBM's $60 billion world sales in 1988 were in Europe; DEC and several other American computer companies also showed major gains across Europe.
The US general electronics giant, General Electric, was increasingly aggressive in pursuit of European sales.
AT&T also at last hit its post divestiture stride in the US domestic market; and in 1989 AT&T had its first major success in Europe — being chosen to be the main foreign partner (with Italtel) in modernizing the Italian telephone system.
Most of these same forces were also involved in some way in GEC's attempted hostile takeover of Plessey.
In 1988 the GEC-Plessey joint company (GPT) had the second-largest sales of telephone switches in the European market.
The underlying question, however, was whether a company of this size — with virtually all of its sales confined to the British market — could survive.
FRANCE
The French tradition in communications policy
PRESIDENTS FASHION COMMUNICATIONS MEDIA POLICIES
POLITICS, money and technology and the fine contours of broadcasting policy in France.
The term ‘contours’ may appear questionable in the age of direct to-home (DTH) satellite and cable broadcasting, of ‘overspill’and ‘footprints’of satellite beams whose footprint overspills frontiers.
In the past decade the discussion of broadcasting, for so long centred on the peculiarities of ‘FrancoFrench’ in fighting within the hexagon, has increasingly encompassed destabilising international factors.
These have to do,inter alia,with technology: for instance , the World Broadcasting Satellite Administrative Radio Conference WARC 1977) allocation of the frequency spectrum for DBS conceived of as a national service, or the video communications or ‘cable’ plan of 1982, whereby France was to be world leader in interactive fibre-optic networks — and so win export orders.
They have to do with programming: French culture and communications ministers in the 1980S protested at US cultural imperialism -thus, over five years, during prime-time viewing, French-made programmes were allegedly down by 30 percent and American-made programmes up by 60 percent; France is battling to win ‘la guerre des images’— star wars waged via the TV set.
European integration and the desire to strengthen French multi-media groups (such as Hachette) competing against Bertelsmann, Maxwell, Murdoch and the like, also weigh with policy-makers.
Yet the initial approach adopted here is historical.
From 1958 to 1988 French broadcasting policy depended, ultimately, on the wishes of the head of state, and — to a lesser extent — on those of the head of government.
Four men have presided over the Fifth Republic created in 1958: its founder, Charles de Gaulle (born 1890, President 1958 — 69); Georges Pompidou (1911; 1969–74); Valery Giscard d'Estaing (1926; 1974–8 1); Francois Mitterrand (1916; 1981-).
Under each President the relationship between the executive and the broadcasting media remained the central issue of communications policy.
Many of the hardened professionals occupying top posts in broadcasting and telecommunications in the 1980S began their careers in the 1940S and 1950S: for all the progress made towards a recognition of the independence of broadcasters, the communications sector (or ‘landscape’) bears the imprint in 1990 as in 1944 of years of crises and reforms, of purges and witch-hunts.
Thanks primarily to Francois Mitterrand, a regulatory body, independent of the state, was set up in the 1980S to overview public service and other communications sectors and to protect broadcasters from pressures exercised by governments, politicians and lobbies of all kinds.
The idea has taken root; but the plant has proved fragile — the Haute Autorité de la Communication Audiovisuelle (HACA)(1982–6) was replaced by the Commission Nationale de la Communication et des Libertés (CNCL)(1986–8): in 1989 the latter was replaced by a Conseil Supérieur de l'Audiovisuel (CSA).
Broadcasting is so intertwined with politics that even the debate over its regulatory bodies is politicized.
Following each political sea-change in France, since the foundation of the Fifth Republic, the new President and/or head of government has sought to reform broadcasting: in 1959 and 1964 under de Gaulle; in 1969 and 1972 under Pompidou; in 1974 under Giscard d'Estaing; in 1981, 1982 and 1986 under Mitterrand.
Governments have issued ordinances and decrees; they have announced plans and established missions; Parliament has voted laws, sometimes heavily amending bills laid before them by ministers; ministers have been told to revise their draft-bill by the President; the Constitutional Council has refused to accept all the terms of laws voted by Parliament.
Some laws are limited in scope;’ ' others, far more ambitious, consider broadcasting as part of the audiovisual sector, in conjunction with electronic (one-way or interactive) media and, indeed, with telecommunications.’
In the 1980S, as the communications industries multiplied and expanded, and the number of policy-actors and centres of decision (local and regional as well as national (proliferated, it often appeared that the right hand did not know what the left was doing.
Except, seemingly, in the Elysée palace.
During the cohabitation years (March 1986-May 1988), the antagonism between the Conservative Government (responsible for broadcasting and communications policy) and the Socialist President, further aggravated the politicisation of the debate: the left hand knew, and disliked, what the right hand was doing.’
JANUS LOOKS FURTHER BACK THAN FORWARD
France's President in the 1980S was Minister of Information in 1948.
A quarter of a century separates the birth of Mitterrand from that of de Gaulle but Mitterrand, like the latter (and unlike Pompidou and Giscard) was already a national political figure in the 1940S.
It is not entirely fanciful to see in de Gaulle — trained as an officer and renowned as ‘le general’— and Mitterrand — a lawyer by training and sometime political director of Le Courrier de la Nièvre's —the champions of two opposing views in the traditional statist versus liberal debate on the role of the media.
De Gaulle, essentially a man of the radio age, and Mitterrand, who prefers the pen to the mike,’ determined more than anyone else the relationship between the state and television.
The terms ‘media’ and ‘communication policy’were not part of de Gaulle's vocabulary.
And Mitterrand, as President, ascribes to the ‘audiovisual system’ and communications media, a degree of importance but no more.
Both however, belong to generations that discussed ‘the press’ or ‘information’, and ‘the means of information and opinion’with reference to 1631, to 1789 or to 1881…in terms, that is, either of control by the executive (Monarch, Emperor, President of the Republic, etc. and their governments), or else with reference to the right to freedom of speech and of information, to the diversity of the means of expression, to pluralism.
This was the legacy on the one hand, of state control of print media — books, pamphlets, journals, etc. — via the licensing of printers and publishers, censorship and other means (1631–1789), and state control of telecommunications (telegraphy) and sound broadcasting (laws of 1837, 1851 and 1923; ordinance of March 1945, etc.).
And, on the other, of texts symbolizing victories in the struggle for freedom of expression and of the press.
Article 11 of the Declaration of the Rights of Man (August 1789) proclaimed:
the freedom to communicate his thoughts and opinions is one of the most precious of the rights of man; every citizen is therefore free to speak, to write and to print, except in cases where the law lays down that he is liable to prosecution for abuse of that liberty.
The law of 29 July 1881 declared: ‘publishing and the press are free’.
Its counterpart, promulgated 101 years later (to the day) began ‘audiovisual communication is free’.
Various rhetorics, therefore, colour the discussion of communications policy.
Some date from the eighteenth century.
Mitterrand and his left-of-centre ministers (1981–6) presented the strengthening of private sector radio stations and the emergence of private sector television, as increases in the ‘spaces of liberty’.
State control of television predated de Gaulle, but triumphed during his Presidencies (1958–69): as the press opposed him, it was normal that de Gaulle exploit television, the most effective mid-twentieth-century means of propaganda, argued his ministers,sotto voce..
Communications policy, in short, cannot be divorced from recent French political history.
As we shall see, television became a mass medium at a time when France adopted a mixed presidential-parliamentary system, with the President in command.
Recent years have seen a multiplication in the number of TV channels and of communications media other than traditional terrestrial television — government pressure on broadcasters is perforce less effective than when there was only one channel.
But under all four Presidents of the Fifth Republic the state and public  sector actors remained the lodestone, the reference point, of communications policy-making: the dominant political force of the day uses state patronage to fashion the communications landscape in a manner conducive to its interests.’
On 18 June 1940 de Gaulle, aged 49, made his ‘Appeal to the French’ from a BBC studio in London.
Few Frenchmen heard the (later celebrated) broadcast by a little-known general.
Most radio sets were tuned to French stations in what was France's ‘darkest hour’, and Britain's ‘finest’(pace Churchill): families in the north and east emulated their government (and most newspapers published in Paris) and fled the advancing German armies; in Bordeaux many of the Third Republican MPs prepared to vote ‘full powers’ to a hero of the Great War, the octogenarian, Marshal Petain.
Radio had only recently developed into a mass medium for news and entertainment.
In 1939 there were more radio sets than telephone lines.
The total circulation of the 180-odd non-specialist general-interest Parisian and regional daily newspapers was 11 million, and the trend was downwards; the one striking success of the Parisian press in the 1930S was Paris-Soir ; with dramatic action photos, it was more looked at, glimpsed through, than read.
‘Mass media’ whose appeal was essentially audio or visual were to prosper; ‘popular’daily newspapers which — in their layout, contents, and style — made too few concessions to the reader, were on the decline.
The press, however, unlike radio, had won the battle for its ‘formal’ freedom from the state (1789–1881).
The public service broadcasting ethos, developed in the BBC by John Reith, had not crossed the Channel.
Radio in France in the inter-war years was a hybrid: private stations competed against the state network.
But the concept of state monopoly of programme stations (or programming), as well as of transmission networks, was already present.
The state, in France, controls basic transmission networks: the postal system set up by Louis XI in the 1470S was a ‘state monopoly’, from which the general public was denied access until the early seventeenth century.
For reasons of national security a law of 1837 and a decree-law of 1851 conferred on the state a monopoly of transmissions by telegraph, and the policing of the airwaves.
The state's monopoly of telecommunications (telegraphy and telephony) was extended to sound broadcasting: in 1923, a law allotted this to the PTT.
Created in 1879, the Posts and Telegraphs administration was a junior ministry that occupied a central role in the formulation of communications policy in liaison (and in turf-wars (with the Interior, Defence, Foreign, and Colonial Affairs Ministries.
Policy was conducted with ‘a light touch’: save for the period of the Great War, when censorship and other controls operated, the Third Republic (1870–1940) was the most liberal regime France had experienced since the early phase (1789–92) of the Great Revolution.
The July ‘1881 press law removed most of the traditional state controls on the press.
The  politicization of issues and even of policy-making structures remained considerable: one reason for uniting the postal and telegraph administrations in 1878 was to swamp the allegedly Bonapartist ‘telegraphist’ personnel (3000 employees) among the 27,000 postal employees; often of humble social origins, the latter contained ardent supporters of a republic that assured their social advancement.
The advent of twentieth-century mass propaganda technologies and techniques — heralded in the Great War, developed subsequently in totalitarian regimes (the Soviet Union, Nazi Germany)— no less than the development of sound broadcasting in France, led Parliament, after much hesitation, to vote the law of 1923.
This recalled that sound broadcasting fell within the state monopoly of telecommunications, discharged by the PTT.
But the monopoly of transmission was not extended to a programme monopoly.
In 1923, a year after regular sound broadcasts began, private radio stations obtained franchises, licences or ‘concessions’— admittedly on a precarious legal basis.
These stations competed against those of the state network.
They were mostly funded by advertising, as were, initially, some state stations.
From 1933, however, the latter were funded primarily by revenue from the newly introduced licence fee.
In short, while the Foreign and Colonial Affairs Ministries discussed with the PTT how to develop broadcast propaganda overseas and counteract that of non-Parliamentary democracies, within France, governments allowed the emergence of a private, alongside the public, broadcasting sector.
This was as much by accident as by design.
Governments were weak, ideological divisions great: in the press apparent pluralism masked what the left termed ‘a financial oligarchy’; banks and industry and other ‘forces of capitalism’ controlled newspapers, including titles that in the inter-war years veered to the right; press barons diversified into radio — as did their successors, often illegally, a half-century later.
Nonetheless, the pluralism of programme companies, the coexistence of private and public radio stations — in the 1930S as in the 1980S — has led some to observe: perhaps the period 1945–81, of a state monopoly of transmission networks and of programming, was a hiatus, an aberration in the tradition of French broadcasting.
In July 1939 the Daladier government appointed a ‘Commissaire General’ for information: thereafter, most governments, until June 1969, had a minister or junior minister for information.
The PTT lost control of radio and of television — then in its infancy.
The ‘commissar’, or junior minister responsible for broadcasting reported direct to the Prime Minister's office) Présidence du conseil’): state control of broadcasting intensified.
The war (September 1939–Armistice June 1940) and the Occupation (1940–June/August 1944) reinforced the authorities' use of radio for propaganda; radio, however, emerged from the war and Occupation in less disrepute than the press.
During 1940–4, Frenchmen living in metropolitan  France both turned more to the radio and relied less on the press.
Save for the clandestine tracts or news-sheets of the Resistance or Underground, newspapers were rigorously controlled — by the German occupying forces in Paris and the north, and by Petain's Vichy governments in the south.
Frenchmen wanted news of the war, and were assailed by propaganda.
But at least the radio-set enabled one to tune into a variety of propaganda: covert listening (in the basement) to the BBC or other radio stations of ‘allied’ or neutral powers, albeit punished when discovered, was a modest gesture of ‘resistance’by individuals and families who only joined the ‘Resistance’, if at all, in 1943 or 1944.
Radio made de Gaulle a household name in France.
Therein probably lies the potency of the Gaullist concept of state broadcasting.
Beginning with the ‘Appeal’ of 18 June 1940, Gaullist broadcasts ('les Français parlent aux Français') celebrated in the General, the champion of (continuing) resistance in adversity, of ‘a certain idea of France’.
To Churchill and other Allied leaders de Gaulle claimed to speak for France: his subsequent career as Liberator, Father-figure and statesman owed much to the fact that he spoke to the French — when all seemed lost.
The grandiloquent, dramatizing style of the TV orator developed later, but already the appeal was messianic, the choices stark.
The case, of course, can be overstated.
But the notion of an ‘appeal’, of a direct address to the French people — over and above existing intermediaries, authorities, parliaments and parties — has a long tradition in France.
It was said in the 1840S of a future President of the republic that he had the advantage of the ‘magic and mystery of a name’.
Louis Napoleon (President 1848–51; Emperor 1852–70)— for it was he — was the nephew of Napoleon Bonaparte (First Consul 1799–1804; Emperor 1804–14): the nephew bathed in the reflected glory of the uncle.
De Gaulle, thanks to radio, was a voice and a symbol for the French before ever he sought elective office.
In June 1940, radio was the sole means of contact with France; Gaullist ascendancy of the airwaves helped the General establish his legitimacy and the mystique that would long surround his name.
Napoleon and Louis Napoleon favoured government by plebiscite or caesarian democracy.
Government by referendum, by appeals to the mass of the French people, was accompanied by control of the press — the dominant ‘media’ of the day.
Bonapartists subsequently developed a party called ‘l'appel au peuple’.
Neo-demagogues such as the inconsistent General Boulanger (1886–9) aped their techniques.
Radio in the 1940S and television under the Fifth Republic enabled de Gaulle to ‘commune’ with the French people: circumstances frequently conspired to dramatize the stark alternatives associated with his name; in 1940 the rejection of collaboration and defeat; from 1946 to 1958, when out of power and largely absent from the radio, he slowly became ‘le recours’, the possible saviour from the ‘regime des parties’, party factions and divisions; when President (1958–69), and master of the airwaves, the recurrent  implicit or explicit message was ‘but for me, France faces chaos’—‘moi ou le chaos’— the twentieth-century equivalent of Louis XIV's celebrated ‘l'état c'est moi’—‘I am the state’.
To many Frenchmen de Gaulle would indeed appear the saviour of France and of the Republic, from the menace of civil war, born of the Algerian conflict (1954–62), and from communism.
Under the Fifth Republic, control of broadcasting (most of sound radio and all one then two channels of French television) served Gaullist direct democracy: a President elected by universal suffrage (and not — as before 1962 — by Parliamentarians) and other ‘notables’(and periodic recourse to referenda weakened a Parliament where, in any event, governments appointed by the General commanded a majority)
From the Normandy landings in June 1944 to his resignation in January 1946, de Gaulle supervised the reconstruction of war-torn and divided France.
In broadcasting —not a priority issue for the General — the state monopoly of both transmissions and programming was reaffirmed.
Trends apparent in measures taken by Third Republican governments in 1939, but also by Vichy governments between 1940 and 1942, were confirmed: the state monopoly of the airwaves and the integration of all existing radio stations within a state broadcasting corporation, Radiodiffusion Française (RDF), a ‘service exterieur’ within the PTT.
In March 1945 all licences previously accorded to private station operators were revoked.
On 23 June the state monopoly of radio and television was re-established.
Political responsibility for broadcasting (the RDF-RTF (lay directly with the Prime Minister)‘President du Conseil's) or with a junior minister delegated to that end — often the Information Minister (such as Mitterrand in 1948).
The pattern for the next 14 years was set.
De Gaulle resigned after two months as head of the first Government of the Fourth Republic — a regime that had 25 governments in 12 years (1946–58).
De Gaulle periodically lambasted ministerial instability due to party factionalism; Mitterrand, for his part, was seven times minister.
Information, the press and broadcasting proved one of the many — albeit minor — issues that proved intractable for a regime marked by weak government and undermined by colonial wars (Indochina, 1946–54; Algeria, 1954–62, etc.).
As the political complexion of successive governments changed, so — frequently — did many of the top appointments in broadcasting.
Between September 1944 and June 1958 there were 28 Ministers of Information.
The Director-General of RTF was appointed by the government (as were the heads of state or public service radio and TV until 1982): the ‘DG’ appointed in 1946, Vladimir Porche, held his post for 11 years; but governments conceived of broadcasting as a state administration, and Porche himself — a ‘counseiller d'etat’— was the first of a long series of ‘counseillers d'etat’, prefects and top civil servants to head the state broadcasting organizations, RTF and ORTF (i.e. until 1974).
According to J.L. Missika and D. Wolton, politicians were suspicious of broadcasting and  governments allotted it scanty credits; at the same time, governments encouraged the cultural vocation of television, and information ministers (including Mitterrand) accepted arguments from engineers in favour of a high-definition standard of television that was technically satisfying but increased costs.
There was no political consensus about broadcasting.
Between 1944 and 1958 more than 16 bills on broadcasting — centring on the status of RTF failed to reach the statute book.
Before 1950 there was no regional TV station or transmitter: only Parisians could pick up a TV signal; in 1958 only 50 per cent of the population could tune in to the one black-and-white TV channel.
The end-result was general dissatisfaction: programme makers and journalists with engineers and technical staff; both with a top-heavy bureaucracy; and all broadcasters with politicians.
Under the Fourth Republic, television was still in its infancy; radio was the most important of the audiovisual news media; and the press illustrated anew the title of Balzac's novel about journalism —‘Lost Illusions.’
French politicians and elites, but also — argue Missika and Wolton — French society writ large, remained hostile to or suspicious of communication(s): radio and television developed slower than elsewhere — like, as we shall see, the telephone.
Even if the lead has come from above, from state elites, France since the 1970S is a more communications-conscious society than such a prognosis suggests.
But the Fourth Republic undeniably saw the failure of the reforms of communications media, particularly the press, that journalists and Resistance leaders attempted in 1944–6.
Hundreds of journalists were tried in the purges —‘l'épuration’— that followed the Liberation: more perhaps than any other profession, journalists paid the price of collaboration.
In preparations for post-war construction, Resistance figures had planned to ban the continued publication of all newspapers that had collaborated and to create a press that would be economically viable as well as politically free and pluralist: there should be no repetition of the venality of journalists, the concentration of ownership, the submission to the forces of capital, of the inter-war years.
These hopes — briefly encouraged by the number of titles founded, the number of copies printed (1944–6)— were quickly dashed.
The radical overhaul of press legislation did not materialize.
Ordinances of August and September 1944, and a law of May 1954, succeeded more in resolving the problems posed by collaborationist newspapers and journalists, and by the transfer of newspaper plant to the publishers of new titles, than in guaranteeing pluralism and forestalling concentration.
The ordinance of 26 August 1944 stipulated that the same person could not direct more than one publication.
This was the main text invoked by those who opposed the concentration of ownership.
It was flouted — as indeed would be many other laws and decrees, rules and regulations governing communications  during the next 40-odd years.
The non-observance of this particular text (which officially remained on the statute book until January 1987), came to symbolize the weakness and the  politization of communications policies.
The ordinance signally failed to arrest the concentration of ownership which developed apace from 1951.
In particular, it did not prevent Robert Hersant from creating, from 1950 and from nothing, what became by the 1980S France's biggest newspaper publishing group -over 40 titles totalling over one quarter of the circulation of the regional dailies and over a third (38 per cent (of the national daily press.
Hersant — later the ‘bete noir’ of many French journalists, and the press baron whom the socialists love to hate -was condemned for activities during the occupation as a collaborator in late 1945 and lost his civic rights.
Modest success was achieved in one area of media policy.
Until 1957 the French news agency, Agence France-Presse, had no legal status: rival agencies and French communists were among those who presented it as a state or of official agency.
AFP was funded by credits voted by Parliament and defended by the Information Minister.
Its credibility suffered: incoming governments often changed its Director-General — it had six in 10 years.
In 1954 Mitterrand held the information portfolio in the Mendes-France Government: he appointed a Gaullist with left-wing connections, Jean Marin, as ‘DG’— a post Marin succeeded in holding for 2 I years.’
Mitterrand had earlier lent his name to one of the many (abortive (bills intended to give the agency a status in law: now, Marin achieved the task of securing a political consensus sufficiently broad to secure the passage through Parliament of a law ending the provisional status of AFP.
The law enacted in January 1957 still governs in 1990 the operations of the agency.
It was sui generis unlike any other.
But it represents a compromise between opposing or contradictory interests not untypical of media policy.
Mitterrand himself hinted at some of these in 1951:
the possibility of a law to define the status of AFP invariably encounters opposition from governments.
Ministers of Information know…that it is in the State's own interests to give the greatest possible freedom to institutions that depend on it, provided of course that they are well-managed.
The press has a majority on the board of directors (eight seats out of 15) and thereby is held to guarantee pluralism and the agency's independence of the state.
But the state — indirectly — contributes over 50 per cent of annual funds in the form of subscriptions paid for news services.
Thus today French media subscribers pay relatively little for a ‘French-made’ service of national and international news: the French press gets a major news-service cheap (despite its protests to the contrary), and in exchange it serves as a guarantee of the independence of the agency.
De Gaulle was little interested in AFPs’ He considered it normal that he  who pays the piper calls the tune: ‘qui paie commande’.
For national politicians, television was becoming the important medium — even before de Gaulle returned to power (1958).
In 1956, TV first covered a general election night; the premier, socialist Guy Mollet, participated in a ‘Face the press’ programme, and the government protested at TV news coverage of the Suez invasion.
There were only 500,000 TV sets (1957 (and 50 per cent of Frenchmen could not pick up the one black-and-white channel: but politicians perceived the potential of what was to become — under de Gaulle — a mass medium.
In May-June 1958 TV covered (some of (the dramatic circumstances, born of the regime's inability to resolve the Algerian conflict, in which de Gaulle returned to power: Parliament voted full powers to de Gaulle, the (last) premier of the Fourth Republic; in September, the French approved by referendum the constitution of the Fifth Republic; in December de Gaulle was elected (indirectly: not by universal suffrage) President.
Thus, the Gaullist concept of state broadcasting was applied when television became a mass medium, and the regime became presidentialist and plebiscitary.
TV was then considered (in Europe and the USA (to exercise a decisive political influence: de Gaulle emerged as the first French politician who both mastered the instrument, the RTF organization, while proving a charismatic performer.
The number of TV sets rose from under I million in 1958 (989,000 (to over 10 million in 1969 (10,150,000).
Two phases can be distinguished.
Until 1964 — when there were 4.4 million sets — there was only one channel (black-and-white); programme hours (65) were not significantly greater than a decade earlier (53 hours in 1953).
The impact of the ‘Journal télévisé’(main news bulletin (and the effectiveness of Gaullist control of all state broadcasting, was all the greater.
Gaullists considered it normal that the state control television, the ‘shadow in the cave’ of a growing number of bourgeois drawing rooms and even working-class and peasant breakfast or dining rooms:—‘la télévision, c'est le gouvernement dans la salle à manger’, remarked one Gaullist minister.
Roger Frey, de Gaulle's Minister of Information in January 1959, argued: ‘broadcasting is a means of communication between the state and public opinion; it would be absurd for the government to give it to those who, via the press or otherwise, seek merely to criticize its actions’.
The 8 p.m. news bulletin each evening gave prominence to presidential and governmental words and deeds.
The respectful, not to say reverential, tones of newscasters and commentators made the bulletin into something of an act of communion —‘la grande messe du journal de 20 heures’.
The initial appearances of the 68-year-old President were somewhat mechanical, with a staccato delivery.
But, coached by a director of la Comédie française, the voice of 1940 was allied to the imperious gestures and stature of 1958: for Pierre Lazareff, the leading journalist of the French popular press, de Gaulle eclipsed  all previous, and contemporary, politicians in his use of the box.
Between 1960 and October 1962 de Gaulle directly addressed the French people via television 21 times.
This first phase of Gaullist control of television began with an ordinance and ended with a law.
The ordinance of 4 February 1959 transformed RTF into an ‘épic’— a public body ‘with an industrial and commercial character’, with a distinct legal status but no real financial autonomy.
After the failure of 16 broadcasting bills and proposals since the Liberation, the first text to organize television in 25 years failed to command a consensus comparable to the 1957 law on AFP.
This text — not, it should be noted, a law voted by Parliament — was the first of what would prove to be six major reforms of broadcasting between 1959 and 1988.
The Gaullist conception of state broadcasting would prove an unconscionably long time in dying-in May 1986 Communications Minister Léotard still referred to the need to reduce state control —‘la desétatisation de l'audiovisuel’.
The 1959 decree did not fundamentally change the existing situation — argue Missika and Woltons — but it was perhaps the text that, more than any other, showed that ‘public service broadcasting’ would not develop on lines akin to Britain's BBC.
Three issues were intertwined: it was only in 1974 (and even more so in 1982 and 1986) that they began to be unravelled; broadcasting was a state monopoly, with public service obligations; broadcasting (programming as well as transmissions (was controlled by the state; the organization of production, programming and transmission within RTF presented managerial, financial and other difficulties but, before I 974, governments refused to ‘dismantle’ the state broadcasting corporation.
In June 1964 a law transformed RTF into O (for ‘Office’(RTF's' This law had more to do with the organizational needs of a body attempting to adjust to the expansion of broadcasting than with the issue of political control.
By 1964 there were 4.4 million TV sets; a second TV channel began transmitting programming in April; the amount of programming transmitted by the two channels rose from 4000 hours annually to 7400 hours (1964–7); the number of TV sets rose by a million a year between 1964 and 1967.
TV had definitely become a mass medium.
Gaullist control of broadcasting did not lessen.
According to the 1959 decree, the government appointed the Director-General (DG (and RTF was directly accountable to the Information Minister.
The 1964 law placed ORTF under the stewardship) 'tutelle' (of the Minister; the state controlled the board of directors.
The Information Minister between 1962 (April-September and again from December and January 1966) was Alain Peyrefitte: he described, in an oft-reproduced passage, his surprise on finding that his office had a direct telephone line to the heads of RTF and of broadcasting news and current affairs departments.
He admits that, faced with the emergency caused by OAS terrorists, he resorted to the practice of his predecessors: the Information  Minister acted as editor-in-chief of the prime-time evening news broadcasts.
Later, the respected historian and broadcasting executive, Jean-Noel Jeanneney, showed how specious is the outraged innocence and protestations of liberalism affected by Peyrefitte: he quoted the Director of Radio Pierre de Boisdeffre (1963–8): ‘the Information Minister acted as Director-General of ORTF’.
De Gaulle himself sent Peyrefitte notes deploring the pessimism and ‘bad news’ highlighted in TV news bulletins: ‘it is obvious that the ‘journalist’(the inverted commas are de Gaulle's (had received no directive or, if he had, completely ignored it'.
Peyrefitte created a service, SLII, whose 12 members — from the cabinets of various ministries — acted as his eyes and ears in ‘Broadcasting house’.
Journalists and producers who fell out of favour were ‘put on the shelf’(‘mis au placard’)— thereby accentuating what was already part of broadcasting mythology: in the 1980S as in the 1940S, key managerial, editorial and programming appointments and dismissals — who's ‘in’ and who's ‘out’— were attributed as much (or more) to political as to professional factors.
Under de Gaulle, therefore, the Information Minister was a Broadcasting Minister — to whom the head of state sometimes expressed, day by day, his anger with the content of news and current affairs programmes.
Hard-pressed over content, the minister sought also to improve the organization of broadcasting.
Technological improvements — the choice of the system or standard for colour television (in 1967 France chose SECAM, while the rest of Europe chose the German system, PAL (— were defended in terms of national independence.
Industrial policy required support for national champions.
France lagged behind Britain and Germany in the number of TV sets per capita and (until 1964) in the number of channels.
Politicians used protectionist arguments — the defence of French industry, of French culture — with expansionist overtones.
The controversies associated with the politicization of broadcasting masked three developments of long-term significance for communications policy:
1.
the political and organizational failure of the state's control of broadcasting;
2. changes in the listening and viewing habits and expectations of the public;
3. developments outside the spheres traditionally associated with the Information Ministry that would increasingly impinge on communications policy-making.
De Gaulle's notes to Peyrefitte, mentioned above, indicate dissatisfaction with the implementation of the state broadcasting policy.
Many newspapers denounced the state-run ORTF: de Gaulle criticized the ‘Journal televise’ for quoting politically hostile newspapers.
Public dissatisfaction was particularly great with state radio.
With television — unless one lived near a frontier — there was no choice; with radio, there was choice, nationwide: the three ‘peripheral’ radio stations, Europe 1, RTL, RMC were more popular than ORTF radio stations.
Peyrefitte cites a public opinion survey (IFOP, April 1962): all the  RTF stations together totalled an audience of 9 per cent; the audience of the ‘peripheral’ stations was 91 per cent .
The ORTF had become too big to be effectively controlled politically by the Information Minister or effectively managed by DGs (three between 1958 and 1964); the latter, whether top civil servants, ‘conseillers d'etat’ or not, were not broadcasting professionals and had too short a ‘run’to master the vast and complex, heavily unionized and bureaucratic juggernaut that the ORTF had become.
Between 1961 and 1974 there were umpteen proposals to reform the management, account procedures, and organization of ORTF.
Peyrefitte himself deplored the ‘anarchy’, ‘disorder’, ‘corporatism’, ‘bureaucracy’, ‘wastefulness’ and ‘paralysis’of RTF;’only to lament, later, the weakness of an Information Minister faced by the Treasury.
The 1964 law provided that ORTF should have financial autonomy: control would be a posteriori .
But on I 5 August the Finance Ministry issued a decree stating it would exercise a priori control.’
Many of the Ministers — Information, Culture and Communication, PTT and others — that have helped fashion communication policies in the Fifth Republic have seen their plans (and, in the case of the PTT since 1983, even their [DGT]profits (pillaged by the Finance Ministry.
The state monopoly of television in a country that prided itself on its tradition of freedom and pluralism of the means of expression — failed.
The failure became glaringly apparent in the May-June events of 1968, and the 6-week long strike that they triggered off; timid liberalization in I 969, and an attempted reform of ORTF in 1972, proved largely abortive; and in 1974 ORTF was dismantled.
Yet as early as 1964, Peyrefitte observed: ‘no one is satisfied with RTF — the public, the majority, the Opposition, the Government’.
Nor might he have added — were broadcasters.
The year 1965, we saw, was when TV reached up to 30 million viewers equated, by Y.Gasser, with ‘the general public’.
It was also the year of the first presidential election held under universal suffrage.
De Gaulle did not address the electorate in the first of two rounds: Opposition politicians hardly ever (or never) seen on TV- did, and had a considerable impact.
The press saw in Jean Lecanuet — he of the white teeth, flashing smile, youthful appearance, centrist and pro-US ‘Atlanticist’ policies — a French J. F. Kennedy; Mitterrand, the left FGDS candidate, was perceived as stilted and ill-at-ease.’
 Mitterrand , however, perpetrated a crime ‘de lèse-majesté’: he forced de Gaulle to a second-round run-off; the President, who this time addressed the nation via TV, won with ease.
De Gaulle, however, was experiencing the disadvantages of over-exposure: age had withered and custom staled his infinite televisual variety.
The General's dramatization of events appeared ill-suited to an apparently quiescent domestic France —‘la France s'ennuie’(‘is bored’) wrote Le Monde's Viansson-Ponte's.
During the May-June 1968 ‘events’— of student barricades and civil unrest — it was via the radio, not TV, that — as on 18 June  1940 — the General appealed to the French (30 May).
The appeal by the 77-year-old General, dissolving Parliament, followed the same day by a demonstration of 800,000 Gaullists in the Champs Elysées, is generally seen as a turning-point: order was restored and Gaullists triumphed at the ballot box (23/24June 1968).
Television had become a central issue of public and political debate.
Discredited, politicized and apparently unmanageable, ORTF was one of the many Gaullist and Establishment sacred cows to suffer from the ‘contestation’ of May-June 1968 and its aftermath.
But ‘contestation’— the calling into question of authority — came from within as well as without.
The longest strike (O) RTF had ever experienced was one obvious sign.’
Yet the very development of television helped reduce the intended impact of the Gospel of good news delivered at the 8 o'clock ‘mass’.
The state monopoly of television channels would survive until 1982: but in 1964 a second channel was created; 70 per cent of the population could receive it by 1966; its first news broadcasts were transmitted in 1967.
The ‘monolithic’ character of state TV was ending.
Viewers and listeners were increasingly selective.
The year 1966 was when the number of people paying a TV licence for the first time exceeded the number paying a radio licence.
But changes in accounting procedures and the development of transistor sets signal caution.
Radio listening habits, especially among the young, transistor, generation were increasingly individualistic (early morning, late at night), at the same time as the TV entered the home and, often in working-class families, ousted the traditional radio set as the collective evening news and entertainment medium.
Many parents and grandparents in the provinces followed ‘the May-June events’ on state-run television: their view of what was happening differed from that of the younger generation in Paris and university campuses across the country; many students followed developments hour by hour on Europe I — if they did not themselves join the demonstrations and mount the barricades.
‘Liberate ORTF’ was one 1968 slogan; ‘Death to consumer society’another.
The same year that demonstrators lit a fire in the Paris Stock Exchange, brand advertising began on television.’
To arguments of advertisers and advertising agencies was added finance and information ministry concern to supplement revenue from licence fees, so great were the costs of ‘wasteful’ ORTF.’
Many limits were imposed on the duration, nature and volume of brand advertising — largely because of newspaper opposition: the ORTF law of 1972 stated advertising revenue should not exceed 25 per cent of total ORTF revenue.
But some advocates of public service broadcasting — citing the BBC as an example opposed the ‘commercial logic’ advertising would entail: competition between the two state channels might be healthy professionally, it would be pernicious otherwise — ratings wars, lowering of standards, especially during prime time.
And, in 1972 a ‘clandestine advertising’ scandal led to a Parliamentary report  on ORTF ‘abuses’: programme-makers had received favours from manufacturers to do ‘product-placement’— the frequent use of a given make of car in the same film, for instance.
The traditional cultural and pedagogic role ascribed to television appeared undermined by the increasing stress on entertainment-led programming (especially on the second channel, 1964), and the developing competition (1969–70) between the two channels.
Brand advertising developed albeit artificially contained.
In effect, professional and financial factors combined with political pressures to strengthen the camp of those who pressed for the reform of ORTF.
Gaullists were divided.
In April 1969, following an adverse vote in the referendum on regionalization, de Gaulle resigned.
Georges Pompidou, his Prime Minister between 1962 and 1968, was elected president.
His ‘liberal’ Prime Minister, Jacques Chaban-Delmas, encouraged broadcasting reforms that ‘conservative’Gaullists, suspicious of ‘left-wing subversives’in ORTF, could not stomach.
‘Chaban’ suppressed the Ministry of Information (June 199).
In September two distinct news units or departments — one for each channel — were set up: ‘Chaban’ later observed that the appointment of Pierre Desgraupes as head of news on channel I was the initial factor that brought together those who were to plot his own downfall in I 972.
Jacqueline Baudrier, another seasoned professional, but more acceptable politically to Gaullists, headed the unit on channel 2.82 Competition between the two channels was strengthened in 1970: programme directors for each channel were appointed (Pierre Sabbagh and M.Cazeneuve); and the second channel, like the first, carried brand advertising; it, too, could now be received throughout France.
Yet competition — professionally desirable — remained politically taboo.
The concept threatened, ultimately, the state's monopoly of TV, as exercised by ORTF.
At a press conference on 2I September 1973, President Pompidou declared: ‘A television journalist is not quite like other journalists.
He has special responsibilities…
Television is held to be the voice of France, by the French, and abroad.’
The scale of the resources at the disposal of a TV journalist, and the monopoly status of ORTF required, continued Pompidou, that TV journalists observe ‘a certain reserve.
This line of reasoning appeared to excite more criticism abroad than it did in France.
The broadcasting ‘liberalization’ phase under ‘Chaban’had ended: the broadcasting law of July 1972 had distinguished between the state monopoly of radio and television broadcasting and the public organization (ORTF (entrusted with the monopoly; the same law increased — on paper — the autonomy of ORTF and the powers of the ‘MD’who became in addition chairman of the board of directors ('PDG'); but conflicts arose between the first ‘PDG’, Arthur Conte, and the Information Minister, Philippe Malaud.
Malaud criticized the ‘leftist’(‘gauchiste’) tone of ORTF programmes — not just the news, but fiction and documentary  programmes.
Although supported by most ORTF personnel, a ‘PDG’ appointed by the government could not survive in a contest with the Information Minister.
Within weeks of Pompidou's September declaration, Conte had left ORTF — to be replaced by yet another top civil servant, the ‘enarque’ Marceau Long.
Since the ordinance of 1959, laws and decrees had gradually increased the organizational autonomy of ORTF; but in 1973, as in 1959, broadcasters were left in no doubt that the government controlled the state broadcasting organization.
Pompidou died in April 1974: his death, after a long and painful illness, had been expected by politicians, but surprised a general public unprepared by ORTF news bulletins.
Broadcasting was not a major issue of the — relatively brief — presidential election campaign that followed; but television played an important role.
The Gaullist candidate, Chaban-Delmas, was beaten in the first round: thus ended the period (1958–74) when Gaullists alone had controlled the apparatus of state broadcasting.
A political sea-change occurred.
The right and centre-right, ‘conservatives’ and ‘liberals’continued to control both the presidency (1974–8I) and the prime ministership (1974–81; 1986–8); but the ‘ancien regime’of state broadcasting was at an end.
In the second round runoff the ‘liberal’ Valery Giscard d'Estaing faced — and defeated (19 May)— the socialist, Francois Mitterrand.
For the first time a live televised debate between the two ‘finalists’ was held.
Television, it was generally agreed, did not ‘make’ the election.’
But market research, opinion polls and academic ‘advisors’ confirmed politicians in their belief that it might contribute to swaying the decision of the 3–4 per cent of ‘floating’electors; these votes could decide the election.
In 1974 Giscard d'Estaing's belief in his televisual appeal was perhaps as great as Mitterrand's dislike of ORTF.
Giscard d'Estaing made broadcasting reform a priority: as with de Gaulle before him, and Mitterrand (in 1981–2 and 1988) and Chirac (in 1986) since, broadcasting was presented as one of the unsolved problems of the previous regime.
A law was voted — somewhat hastily (7 August 1974); some of its features are still valid in 1990.
Above all, ORTF was dismantled.
Its  12,00 or more employees were, in the main, reallocated to the seven companies that took its place.
The government controlled key appointments: the heads of the seven ‘independent’, ‘autonomous’ public service companies were appointed in cabinet.
But the distinction between ‘programme’ and ‘service’companies proved a lasting gain.
Four programme companies were created: three operated television channels — Television Française (TFI), Antenne 2 (A2) and France Regions 3 (FR3); the fourth, Radio France, managed the several radio stations (France-Inter, France Culture, France Musique) of the public network.
Technical servicing — the creation, organization and development of infrastructures and networks to transmit programmes — was the task of Télédiffusion Française (TDF).
Film and video production (for TV channels, but also for the cinema and other clients) was assigned to the Societe Française de Production (SFP); research, training, sound and film archives, and a limited production role, to the Institut National de l'Audiovisuel (INA).
Thus the law separated programming from transmission (completely), and programming from production (partially).
Formally independent of each other, these seven companies together constituted public service broadcasting: the state monopoly of the airways — and of the content of broadcasting — persisted.
Many see the 1974 law as a half-way house: organizational reform was welcomed, as was the notion of competition between TV channels.
But competition — particularly during prime time heralded ratings wars and the ‘commercial logic’ associated with private sector television.
Exhortations to channel operators to co-ordinate their programme schedules and content were often ignored; for the two main channels, brand advertising was the chief source of revenue — the choice of attractive programming at 8.30 p.m. (a film, telefilm or series; sports; light entertainment, games, shows) all-important.
‘Are rivalry and competition synonymous with liberty and independence?’
This was one of the rhetorical questions addressed by communications policymakers and broadcasters in the 1970S.
The 1974 law reflected a mix of bold intentions and unenforceable (or enforced) stipulations that would later also characterize the 1986 communications law.
But the ‘liberals’ of 1974, unlike their later counterparts, maintained the monopoly of public service broadcasting.
Much time and energy in the early 1970S was spent on distinctions between state and public service broadcasting.
The latter term had, and has, connotations often different from British usage.
This partly reflects requirements imposed on all French ‘public service’ organizations — continuity of service, equal treatment for all, adaptability.
For example, when premier in 1971, Chaban-Delmas (1969–72) sought to reform ORTF by a ‘contrat de plan’ akin to those he imposed on other public service organizations.
These have a distinct administrative and legal status and traditions.
ORTF and ex-ORTF companies, and public service broadcasting organizations in 1990, would be governed by texts (laws, ordinances, decrees, rules and regulations (that constituted a growing corpus of communications law, but they would also be subject to texts governing all public services, and, of course, to the Constitution itself.’
The four functions of public service broadcasting were stipulated in the June 1964 law creating ORTF — to inform, to entertain, to educate and to ‘cultivate’.
While the 1972 law distinguished between the functions and the body — ORTF — entrusted with their implementation, the 1974 law detailed how the state intended broadcasters to meet their obligations.’
This was via ‘cahiers des charges’— a procedure detailing terms of conditions, akin to that imposed on all bodies entrusted with a public service.
Periodically revised and completed, these ‘rules and regulations’ bore the imprint of the administrative  tradition that had hitherto governed broadcasting, and were criticized for their formalism — and insufficient recognition of the realities of broadcasting.
Yet these ground rules helped identify how the state (and, later, from 1982, regulatory bodies (was to hold the ring between various professional and economic interests in the broadcasting, and indeed audiovisual, sectors.
Public service broadcasting objectives were intertwined with two other issues: the state as arbiter between different interests (programme companies, the cinema industry, etc. (and state support for ‘worthy’ or ‘noble causes’— the defence of the French language, of French film production, of programmes for children.
In the 1982 communications law — and even in its 1986 counterpart ‘cahiers de charge’ again detailed the ‘general obligations’imposed on public service broadcasters.
The government consults (broadcasting companies, Parliament, and — after 1982 — advisory or regulatory bodies) but, in the final analysis, it makes the rules.’
Even in 1986 — when TFI was privatized and when the deregulation of broadcasting involved a transfer of power from the Communications Ministry to the Regulatory Body, the CNCL — employees of the Law Department of the CNCL stressed the importance of the residual powers of the government, exercised partly via the ‘cahiers des charges’.
The 1974 law — unlike those of 1982 and 1986 — was little debated in Parliament.
The bill was drafted by civil servants, lawyers and ‘énarques’— among them Henri Pigeat, later the number two (1976) and head (1979–86) of AFP.
They determined the ‘cahiers des charges’ on the basis of instructions from the Prime Minister (J. Chirac) or the Culture and Communications Minister (J.P.
Lecat).
Between 1974 and 1981, therefore, Gaullist and Giscardian politicians fashioned the broadcasting policies that technocrats and broadcasters were to implement.
Some of the government appointments as heads of the programme companies were proven professionals — under ORTF: for example, in 1978, the head of TFI, Jean-Louis Guillaud, had previously advised Pompidou on broadcasting and prepared the launching of the third channel; the head of A2, Maurice Ulrich, would later be ‘Chef de Cabinet’ of Chirac when premier (1986–8); Claude Contamine, head of FR3, and later (1986–9) head of A2, had been one of the first — when assistant DG of ORTF in 1964 — to commission work from independent producers, despite ORTF's formal monopoly of production; further proof-if it were needed — of the longevity of the connection between broadcasting and the state.
Attitudes and mentalities fashioned over 30 years did not change overnight.
But the broadcasting reform of 1974, and the new balance of power (liberal centre-right President Giscard and neo-Gaullist Premier Chirac) helped transform the relationship between government ministers and broadcasters.
This remained fraught, but the tension was comparable at times to that between government politicians and public service broadcasters in, say, the  Britain of Wilson and Callaghan or Margaret Thatcher.
During the Giscard Presidency: the news and current affairs coverage satisfied no-one: neither the President, who thought — and said — that the journalists of the state television had been better disposed toward his predecessors; nor the socialist and communist opposition which periodically ran campaigns in favour of the freedom of news broadcasting.’
During Chirac's first premiership (1974–6) government pressure on broadcasters remained strong: during the Raymond Barre premiership (1976–81), by contrast, the ability of TV journalists to resist presidential and other pressures was increasingly evident.
Newspapers — with the daily Le Monde and the satirical weekly Le Canard enchaîné often to the fore — were more vigorous in their pursuit of investigative journalism and in revealing politically ‘explosive’ scandals.
But in 1979, to the Elysée's amazement and consternation, Roger Gicquel, anchorman on TFI ‘s 8 p.m. news, alluded — albeit prudently — to what was becoming a French ‘Watergate’—‘l'affaire des diamants’, in which President Giscard was suspected of accepting diamonds from the self-styled ‘Emperor’ Bokassa.
State radio and television reported a story that they would not have dared touch a few years earlier.
Some journalists were less timorous than previously: competition between channels encouraged ‘professionalism’.
Others continued to practise self-censorship.
Journalists worried that ‘MDs’ appointed by the government would not ‘cover’them; and independence indeed remained a fragile plant: there was an election of one sort or another every year between 1977 and 1981.
The media themselves popularized the notion of ‘the band of four’: two, competing, leaders on the left — the Communist Party's Georges Marchais, and the socialist Francois Mitterrand opposed two competing leaders on the right, Giscard and Chirac.
Giscard claimed journalists did not distinguish sufficiently between fact and opinion; ‘shut up Elkabbach’, Marchais told a journalist portrayed as a Giscardian, who was questioning him closely; on 10 May 1981, when Mitterrand (finally) won the presidential election, the crowd gathered in the revolutionary holy of holies, place de la Bastille, yelled abuse at Elkabbach.
Broadcasting remained politicized, while politicians a la Giscard cultivated television as never before.’
MATTER OVER MIND: CONDUITS NOT CONTENTS
During the 1970S the ramifications of some communications policies were perceived dimly, if at all.
Broadcasting policy — discussed primarily in terms of organization and content — hogged the headlines.
But under Pompidou and Giscard, the renovation — or creation — of communications infrastructures became priorities in state planning: the telephone system would be transformed from one of the most backward in the developed world to one of the most  advanced.
In broadcasting (uncomfortably) and in telecommunications (more discreetly), the state acted via public corporations, administrations or utilities ‘ex-ORTF’(notably) TDF, and the DGT (within the PTT).
In both conventional, terrestrial over-the-air broadcasting and, more broadly, in telecommunications, the state monopoly was grounded in legislation extending back to 1837; the need to police the air-waves and the limited capacity of the spectrum were used in its justification.
Both would appear increasingly outmoded at a time when technological innovation was presented as indispensable to the modernization of the economy, ‘the computerization of society’.
Furthermore, the convergence of computing and telecommunications would (later) present policy-making difficulties as great as the increasing interface between broadcasting and telecommunications.
Ministries and departments were not organized so as to devise ‘communications policy’ that could encompass information technology and the mass media.
Broadcasting policy involved not only state-controlled or public service radio and television but also the cinema, the press and advertising: the state aided financially, partly regulated, and even owned film studios, newspapers and advertising agencies — but, since the Liberation, the mentality in all three was worlds removed from the bureaucratic tradition of state broadcasting.
In the 1920S and 1930S newspapers had feared the threat to their news function and advertising revenue posed by radio.
From the 1960S the press and radio feared the advertising and news ‘menace’ of television.
Ministers of Information under de Gaulle and Pompidou, and Ministers of Information, or of Culture and/or Communication, under Giscard d'Estaing were responsible for policy towards — and for arbitrating between — these ‘established’ or ‘mass’media.
They were often less closely associated than colleagues from other ministries or departments (Gérard Théry of the DGT, during the Giscard Presidency, for instance) with policies towards communications technology and the ‘new media’.
The beginnings of cable and satellite policy showed the dangers of such a fragmentary approach.
In December 1973 cabinet authorized the cabling of seven towns in France, to test the potential for local services.
Little came of this, partly because of the resistance from regional newspapers, and partly because of the Jacobin traditions of a government little inclined to decentralize.
Again, a project for video-transmission of TV signals between Paris and several provincial cities was authorized by a cabinet subcommittee in 1975, and involved TDF and SFP; it was abandoned in 1977.
Finally, in September I 979, cabinet authorized the decision to co-operate with Germany in the construction of a DBS satellite, due to become operational in 1985–6.
Few perceived this would increase the demand for programmes (that the satellite could transmit).
‘DBS was planned in terms of an economic competition with other European or American projects rather than as part of a communications policy: the problem  was approached with a concern with the conduits not with the programmes, with the technologies involved, not with the services.
Content was a secondary consideration’ for policy-makers.’
This example suggests some of the conundrums or dilemmas facing policymakers in the 19705 and 1980S.
The government was not to influence content, but the state and/or regulatory bodies and/or the law courts were to ensure that ‘civilized values’, ‘morality’ and ‘decency’were respected.
State aid is needed to help those who make TV programmes and feature films, who write or publish newspapers, etc. — the ‘software’ of communications.
The state must also fund massive infrastructure programmes and industrial policies whose applications subsequently impinge on communications — space and defence interact with telecommunications, for example.
How to achieve a balance between the funding of ‘software’ and ‘hardware’was a related difficulty: in 1981 the Socialist Culture Minister, Jack Lang, urged that for every franc spent on conduits (‘tuyaux’) a franc should be spent on programming — the inference was that ‘conduits’had received priority treatment under Giscard, and French TV channels and cinemas suffered from a lack of French-made programmes and films.
The ‘politicized’ debate over broadcasting and ministerial insistence on the ‘cultural’role of public service broadcasting and on aid to the French film industry masked the long-term significance of developments in telecommunications, and the proliferation of communications and entertainment media.
Government ministries and departments and state-controlled companies were sometimes more engaged in ‘turf wars’(‘la guerre des administrations’) than in overviewing and collaborating over long-term developments.
The rivalry between TDF, the broadcasting transmission body, and the DGT, the telecoms division within the PTT's exemplified this.
In mid-1988 the PTT Ministry became the PTE ('E' for space —‘espace’) Ministry and its Minister, Paul Quiles, announced that France Télécom would become the majority shareholder in TDF.
Ten years — at least— of organizational procrastination and rivalry had elapsed before this solution — recognizing the convergence between space, telecommunications and broadcasting-appeared politically feasible.
In the meantime France had built a DBS satellite — TDF-I — with, if not nowhere to go, few programmes to show: the Luxembourg government, various (non French) private sector TV channel consortia, and other potential partners and clients, had been alienated, as successive French governments dithered and dallied, and technologies — and the cost of their application — evolved.
In 1978 the Nora-Minc report suggested the formation of a Communications Ministry.’
But a unique ministry overviewing the totality of the hardware and software of communications was not created.
The politicization and fragmentation of policy decision-making continued.
The advent of the left to office in 1981 (after 23 years in the wilderness), and the co-habitation between  a socialist President and a neo-Gaullist, conservative Premier in 1986–8, did not simplify matters: especially — as we shall see — as the President in the Elysée (since de Gaulle)— has advisers who urge policies sometimes different from those advocated by ministers.
THE PLAN, THE ECOLE(S) AND THE UNLIKELY BEDFELLOWS
A week is a long time in politics, said Harold Wilson.
Learning curves in the research, development and applications of communications technologies, may taken 10, 20 or 30…years.
France has had no super-communications ministry; but it has had a long tradition of state control, planning and Jacobin centralism.
This was renewed following the Liberation, under de Gaulle (June 1944-January 1946) and again when de Gaulle returned to power in 1958.
State planning began under de Gaulle, in January 1946 (and was entrusted to Jean Monnet); a ‘school’ to complete the training of top civil servants, l'Ecole Nationale d'Administration (ENA) was founded by the future Gaullist Prime Minister, Michel Debré (1958–62) in October 1945.
Communications were not a high priority in post-war reconstruction: France lagged behind Britain in building TV transmitters and relay stations or in installing telephone switch exchanges.
One — extreme — interpretation is that governments suspected communications that they did not control: many an allegation of phone-tapping marked the politics of the Fourth and (early) Fifth Republics.
But state-funded programmes in nuclear energy, defence, and space from the late 1950S would influence telecommunications policies in the 1960S and 1970S.
Furthermore, communications planning-however dispersed the centres of decision — was also influenced by the training, connections and (enterprise)‘culture’ of the technocrats involved.
It is to these aspects that we shall now turn.
It is unusual to consider them in conjunction with the ostensibly different milieux and traditions of broadcasting.
We contend that in the 1970S and 1980S these ‘worlds’ increasingly overlap and intertwine.
To cite, or suggest, but two examples: in space and telecommunications (telecoms), Fifth Republican France developed hybrid bodies (the CNES, the DGT) that were part public administration, part public company: to generous funds from the state they sometimes (the DGT (added capital raised via loans on the open market; their legal status posed — and still poses — a problem;’ ' but, freed of the obligation to show a quick return on investment, they piloted R&D projects through to the point-5, 10, 20 years later — where state-funded infrastructures (telecoms satellites, the minitel, cable, etc.) began to show commercial applications.
Some projects succeeded the minitel — others proved costly and apparently failed (TDF satellites): but at a time of convergence and synergies, they made France a world leader in telecoms and space.
Under the Fifth Republic the ‘creme de la creme’ of the state-funded higher education ‘grandes écoles’staff the higher echelons of ministries, departments and other public bodies, public and private companies, concerned with the research, management and financing of the arms, telecommunications and space industries.
Recruited by intensely competitive examination, many graduated in pure and applied science, in engineering or mathematics — notably the ‘polytechniciens’ and ‘centraliens’, graduates of (the MoD-funded (Ecole Polytechnique, and of l'Ecole Centrale.
‘Polytechniciens’ are perhaps the most prestigious; ‘enarques’, the most ubiquitous.
The latter, graduates from l'Ecole Nationale d'Administration, the high-powered ‘finishing school’ of high-flying civil servants (and often future politicians), occupy top public and private sector positions.
Graduates from the more specialist (and less prestigious) Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Télécommunications (ENST) are found throughout the top management of the DGT and, in particular, in the key positions within the R&D division of the DGT, the CNET.
Much is sometimes made of the rivalries or jealousies fostered by these networks; a ‘revolution’ occurred in 1974 when the person appointed to head the CNET, Jean-Pierre Souviron, was not, like his predecessors, the product of ENST but of another engineering ‘grande école’— l'Ecole des Mines.
But the obverse is more important; the network of help and contacts.
In 1974 one-quarter (25 per cent(of the governing class were ‘enarques’ and ‘polytechniciens’.
Already, towards the end of the Fourth Republic, in 1957, there were 152 ‘polytechniciens’ in the top managerial posts in public and private sector, military and civilian R&D bodies or companies: in the Atomic Energy Commission (CEA), the Aerospace Research Office (ONERA, located within the Technical Research Division (DRET (of the DGA — the armaments division of the Defence Ministry), the Ministry of Education, and the National Defence Science Committee that advised the Prime Minister (all seven members were ‘polytechniciens’).
The remaining members of these 152 ‘polytechniciens’ were to be found in the management of leading arms industry companies: Sud-Aviation employed 25 ‘polytechniciens’, Dassault I8, the CSF 20, Thomson-Houston 28, the CGE 37.
In short, therefore, the state has been the driving force in the creation of a community of researchers, civil servants and managers, industrialists and businessmen; their ranks and strategic importance have expanded with the growing osmosis between the defence, telecommunications and space industries.
Of course, ever since the creation of the first ‘grandes écoles in the eighteenth century, and the organization of ‘I'Universite’ by Napoleon, the state has been alma mater .
Between 1945 and 1985, 3700 students graduated from ENA most of whom successively occupied top civil service positions in the governance of the nation, the regions, and the ‘departements’(counties).
But many graduates of state-funded ‘grandes écoles’—‘énarques’, ‘polytechniciens’, etc. — subsequently, at some stage in their careers, leave public service employment and enter the private sector: they — or normally the company that recruits them — may have to reimburse the state (which financed their studies, via bursaries or scholarships).
They ‘pantouflent’— literally speaking, put on their slippers — on leaving public service for the (generally more lucrative) private sector.
Traditionally, ‘polytechniciens’ do this most.
In I 987 the economic magazine L'Expansion surveyed the qualifications of the chairmen and managing directors of a hundred leading French companies: 27 were graduates of l'Ecole Polytechnique, six of ENA, and six of a leading business ‘grande école’, HEC.
At a more modest level, an apparent weakness of the French system of training engineers, as compared with the British system, may prove an advantage in this transition from public to private sector employment.
Peter Whalley has compared British engineers with their French counterparts — the graduates of l'Ecole Centrale des Arts et Manufactures de Paris, l'Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Arts et Métiers, or some 170 other ‘petites écoles d'ingénieur’.
The British engineer surrounds his knowledge in a rhetoric of practicality; the French one develops a rhetoric of theory, of mathematical and engineering science.
Graduates of French elite engineering schools enter a company as a ‘cadre’, with managerial status, rather than as technicians.’
They ‘function not as technical specialists but as polyvalent managers’, and expect to have technicians assigned to them to do detailed and routine tasks.
Only in high-tech R&D units do they work as technical staff in any numbers without supporting technicians.
Fine distinctions between different (training) institutions continue to affect the engineer's career long after graduation, and not simply in an informal way.
Companies often use details of education to plot out salary curves and promotion prospects.
Thus, within the telecoms sector, graduates of the Paris-based ENST, which trains ‘cadres supérieurs’ for public and private sector telecom companies and operators, do generally better than those of ENST de Bretagne that trains ‘highly qualified engineers’.
And the latter do better — and are worth more in the telecoms market place — than ‘ingenieurs maison’, who have not graduated from an engineering or telecoms school, have difficulty in making the all important transition from ‘technicien’ to ‘cadre’status, and tend to form the most militantly unionized ‘lumpenproletariat’of say, the DGT or Alcatel.
The advantage of the apparent weakness of the French system is the ‘polyvalent managerial’ skills of French engineers.
As with the higher grades of the French military, these man-management skills of the top-notch graduates are attractive to companies which consider it worthwhile ‘buying out’ graduates of state ‘grandes écoles’.
Trained to respect the hierarchy of command, the military are well viewed by civilian organizations — including large public and  private sector companies — where respect for the chain of command is part and parcel of ‘the management's right to manage’.
In the sectors under study here — the interface between the arms, aerospace and telecommunications industries and engineers — private as well as public sector actors long looked to the state to take the lead: for all the talk of profitability and competitivity in the international market place, procurement policies followed by the DGT with respect to public switching exchanges, or by the Ministry of Defence and the Civilian Space Administration (CNES (towards arms and aerospace equipment manufacturers, reinforced this dependent attitude.
The domestic market was long a relatively protected market and, for many companies until the 1980S, the principal market — the European Community and the French-speaking world beyond, notwithstanding.
Traits common to French industry as a whole promise, therefore, to be particularly acute in the industries studied here.
The following analysis of the influence of armaments engineers on policy making also holds good for telecoms engineers: The key roles played by the corps of armaments engineers in making France's arms complex run can hardly be exaggerated.
Drawn largely from the Ecole Polytechnique, the most prestigious of France's ‘Grandes Ecoles’, the army engineers form a unique and cohesive corps throughout their careers that lead almost inevitably to the highest posts within the Ministry of Defence, the DGA (Délégation Générale pour l'Armament, created in 1961 (and, increasingly, to leadership positions throughout the nationalised and private sectors of the arms industry and to important civilian posts as well.
Sharing a common schooling and formation, they have an engineer's and technocrat's way of looking at issues.
Political objectives and priorities are ostensibly defined elsewhere, not by the corps or the DGA.
The distinction between ends and means is a useful tactic to disarm critics but not very persuasive in practice since what the DGA does is governmental policy.
Likewise, as we shall see, what the engineers (leavened by economists (of the CNET, DGT or France-Télécom decided were priorities became in effect French government telecoms policy — from the minitel to ISDN.