

HO CHI MINH AND THE FRENCH: NATIONAL COMMUNISM? 1920–1946
THE NATURE OF FRENCH COLONIAL RULE
In 1885 France was in possession of a colonial empire which, in 25 years, had grown to three times its original size.
For the time being, and for many this looked like the foreseeable future, she had at least defined the territorial limits and the constituent parts of Vietnam.
Together with the kingdoms of Laos and Cambodia Vietnam was now to be joined in the Indochinese Union although the country itself was divided into three parts.
Cochinchina was a colony; Tonkin was a protectorate; while in Annam there was still an Emperor: with a French résident-supérieur at his shoulder who represented indirect but unmistakably sovereign French power.
Now that traditional Vietnamese fortunes had fallen to their nadir, was there any chance that France could have transformed the country and diverted the course of Vietnamese history?
That is to say, would ‘collaboration’ have been possible?
Or was there something about the nature of French rule that made revolution inevitable?
And that predetermined the nature of the revolution when it came?
Perhaps the greatest danger for France lay in what has been called ‘the suppression of Vietnamese political life’, a theory expressed by Jules Harmand (French Commissioner General in Cochinchina whose ultimatum has already been recorded), in his book Domination et Colonisation (1910).
The first duty of the conqueror, he wrote, ‘is to maintain his domination and to assure that it will last; everything is good which has the effect of consolidating and guaranteeing it, everything is bad that may weaken or compromise it’.
And thus ended, in effect, the doctrine of ‘assimilation’, a Revolutionary principle asserted in the French constitution of 1795 which declared that colonies were integral parts of the Republic.
It was of course an argument that carried with it a certain invincible logic.
Convinced, like the even more outspoken Gustave  Le Bon, that ‘Out of a hundred Hindus educated in English schools, there are a hundred who are irreconcilable enemies of British power’ and that the export of democratic institutions would simply be a form of national suicide, for Harmand it was the lesson of Santo Domingo that counted: the Caribbean negro slave revolt of 1795 which, ten years later, led to the surrender of a French army.
Given these premises, then, anything which allowed native populations to challenge the principle let alone the practice of assimilation was to be avoided; and the ultimate argument was that French culture would simply make the native ‘an enemy better armed against us’.
This was, of course, an extreme statement of the principles of French colonial policy and in practice it was impossible not to export French culture, including political culture, at almost every point at which French administration touched on the life of Vietnam.
Nevertheless, simply to take one influential American book of the 1930s, Virginia Thompson's French Indochina , there are enough echoes to make one wonder whether Harmand's characterization was that much of a caricature.
There is intensified in a colony, she said ‘the French state's perennial anxiety to keep control of every activity and its jealous husbanding of power.
Ever in the presence of a potentially hostile population, the administration must perforce dominate: and the mechanism by which this is accomplished is the regime of decrees.
The result is almost despotic power for the central government and this is as much resented by the colonials as by the natives themselves.’
While one may note that these are observations that may be drawn as much from first principles as from pragmatic induction, studies by other authors who are not averse to imperialism and all its works tend to convey an impression in Vietnam not only of pervasive French presence but of almost total control.
Thus, for example, Duncanson:
Like the Gendarmerie, the Sûreté was a pan-Indochina service, owing loyalty to the state interests of France, not of the native sovereigns, of whose territories it had nevertheless a free run…
In practice the bulk of the work done by the Sûreté was not criminal investigation at all but political control…and its agents, not trained as professional detectives with clearly-prescribed answerability before a judicial authority, generally stood in low public esteem; they were never concerned with safeguarding the personal safety and private property of Vietnamese villagers and seem to have considered themselves primarily as a network of agents to watch over the interests of the French state.
The scope for graft latent in many Asian societies was aggravated in Indo-China by the dependence of French police officers, in their almost universal ignorance of the native languages, upon the inquiries and operations of a class of Indian, Chinese, Eurasian, and other non-native informers whose venality became a byword.
Worst of all, the Sûreté was not averse to operating for ‘reasons of state’ beyond the  terms of the law itself and tended to bring the legal and judicial system of the French administration into disrepute as hardly preferable to the arbitrary Chinese system which it had supplanted.
The system proved little suited to dealing with subversion through intimidation.
Elsewhere, Duncanson tempers his wide-ranging criticism of French rule with strictures on the incompetence and dishonesty of the mandarinate in Tonkin and on the lack of civic virtue of the educated professional class of Vietnamese; but to this theme of what he calls ‘political disabilities’ Lancaster adds what are equally heavy economic burdens.
When the energetic Governor-General Paul Doumer ended his five-year term of office the Vietnamese contribution to public expenditure had increased from an estimated 35 m. gold francs at the time of the French conquest to something like 90 m.
In the course of economic development there were, as one might expect, some outstanding French achievements.
For example, by the time the Mekong had been drained the excavations were comparable to the construction of the Panama canal and in the sixty years before the Second World War there were 4½ m. acres of new land brought into cultivation and correspondingly prodigious increases in the exports of rice.
Nevertheless, the cost of providing an economic infrastructure was one which seemed to bear heavily upon the people and, as far as the rural communities were concerned, it may be argued that the French occupation brought little positive benefits.
The peasant, says Lancaster, would thus seem to have paid a high price for protection from foreign invasion and for increasing immunity from epidemics: which probably represented the principal benefits derived from the French occupation.
In terms of long-range revolutionary potential it was what Lancaster calls the progressive pauperization of the countryside which would have the most ominous consequences, with a rural indebtedness in Cochinchina alone rising from 31 m. piastres in 1900 to 134 m. piastres in 1930.
By the following year, as a result of mortgage and foreclosures, the manifest favouritism shown to French squatters and the pressures of population, peasants in Tonkin were having to feed themselves on average from the product of just over one-third of an acre of padi per head: in some localities barely a fifth.
For the moment, however, and on the assumption that peasant-based revolution takes years of quiet combustion before the fire breaks out, the number of flashpoints increased as the cities grew.
For example, as Duncanson points out, in the public services there was the principle that natives could not aspire to higher posts whatever their technical qualifications.
Thus Indochinese with top marks from the Grandes Écoles in France returned home to serve under Frenchmen with much lower qualifications, or none at all, on a salary which was approximately a fifth of what would be paid to a European doing the same work.
There were in fact three times as many  Frenchmen employed in 1937 to run Indochina, with 30 m. inhabitants, as there were Britons to run India which had more than ten times the population.
At the same time, as late as 1938 there were still only 2,500 Vietnamese who had acquired French citizenship in the whole of Vietnam, three-fifths of them in Cochinchina.
The fact that the Minister of the Colonies had to examine each application personally suggests a degree of caution that verged on the obsessive.
Nevertheless conditions in which limited but often intense urban nationalism would flourish were being created and would provide a catalyst of future revolution; although for a long time fears that educated Vietnamese would rise up against their French masters were certainly not encouraged by the numbers of children in school.
In the mid-1920s only a little over 1 per cent were receiving a formal education.
Higher education was available at the University of Hanoi where some Vietnamese students were introduced to revolutionary nationalism/national communism: although many more were able to ingest ideology and political doctrines in France itself.
In Vietnam, other complaints centred on the lack of industrial development, the stranglehold of French companies and, especially, of the Banque de l'lndochine — a consortium of Paris banks which had a monopoly of banking services — but while one may say that the nature of colonial development or colonial repression in itself created the necessary conditions for revolution or national liberation, it is obviously time to consider how these, and other, factors influenced the forms of Vietnamese resistance.
Here one may note that while, eventually, it was France who not only defined Vietnam but also the character of Vietnamese resistance, it can also be argued that in the impact of the first two revolutionary events of the 2Oth century experienced in Vietnam, the inspiration came from Asia itself.
The extraordinary achievements and transformation of 19th-century Japan, at least as a model for other parts of Asia, had to some extent been tarnished by her conflict with China and her consequent appearance in the ranks of the imperial powers.
Victory over the disintegrating Manchu dynasty was perhaps to have been expected; victory over Imperial Russia was quite sensational.
On its fateful journey from the Baltic the Russian battle fleet had, fortuitously, anchored in Camranh Bay.
Nothing like this concentration of naval power had ever been seen in Vietnam; and we know that it was at least inspected by Vietnamese nationalists who may also have tried to make contact with Russian sailors.
The annihilation of the Baltic fleet a few days later in the Straits of Tsushima was almost unbelievable and was the first defeat of a great power in modern history by an Asian state and for that reason alone Japan's success might have been an example for Vietnam.
The most immediate and exuberant assumption, that of Prince Cuong De, pretender to the throne and a descendant of Emperor  Gia Long, was that the Japanese army would help him to recover his throne and his country; but the example of Japan gave rise to different interpretations.
Was it an example which showed that the power and position of France had first to be destroyed?
Or was it to be an example of ‘self-strengthening’, of, essentially, successful reform?
The alternative inferences are usually associated with the nationalist expositions of two contemporary Vietnamese ‘scholar patriots’.
The first, Phan Boi Chau, believed that the French had to be removed — and that this could only be achieved through armed struggle.
The second, Phan Chu Trinh, did not believe in violence.
Instead, he believed in a sort of reverse assimilation by which Vietnam would emerge as a modern nation assisted, or at least not impeded, by a beneficent France.
Vietnam's weakness was, he believed, endemic to the people and its society, and the first task was to remove the feudal structure so that Vietnam could emerge as a modern state.
Essentially an admirer of France, he exposed the Achilles heel of a French republic founded upon revolutionary principles: but he did not strike at it.
This was an attitude which, long afterwards, was to put him in second place to Phan Boi Chau in the opinion of the Communist Party which, although stressing the patriotism of both men, especially Phan Boi Chau, declared that Phan Chu Trinh had mistaken the principal enemy.
Bourgeois, even liberal, France, would never have given up without a fight.
Reformism could never have succeeded.
In any event, in colonial Vietnam reformists did not fare much better than revolutionaries.
Phan Boi Chau had been sentenced to death.
Phan Chu Trinh was sentenced to life imprisonment.
Neither sentence was carried out and, ironically, both of them ended their lives as virtual pensioners of the French colonial government.
THE INFLUENCE OF JAPAN AND CHINA ON VIETNAMESE NATIONALISM
Of the two Asian models for Vietnamese independence, China and Japan, China was always more immediate and when at last the Chinese Empire fell to pieces and the Manchu dynasty ended in 1911, the impact of this revolution was full of promise for Vietnam.
Not least because of the assumption that the conditions were approximately the same — modernization and foreign domination — and that China might once again be in a position to affect the course of Vietnamese history.
Up until the eve of the First World War resistance and insurrection, although limited, had persisted particularly in the wild hill country of the Sino-Vietnamese border and when the war began in 1914 and the reserves of power available to France, both French and Vietnamese, began to be drained off there was at least a local opportunity for revived resistance.
In the hope that deteriorating wartime conditions in Vietnam would spark insurrection, a liberation army of sorts was being formed on the border; but when the attack went off at half-cock (leaders executed or arrested and followers dispersed) another threat to the French position was removed and it must have become clear that the only credible threat to French power lay in France itself, at least until the forces of nationalism were able to attract some effective outside sponsorship or else embed themselves in the people to the point where they became an organized national resistance.
Of the ‘scholar patriots’ perhaps one can say that, instead, they helped to awaken the national consciousness; and in the evening of his life Phan Boi Chau, in a moving analogy in which Vietnam was likened to an orphan child which by this time should have learned to walk and France to a tutor who felt that the child was easier to control when he was unable to run, talked of a people whose traditional values had been destroyed and who were thus a generation of uprooted people on their own soil.
It was no wonder that the Vietnamese, he said, were willing to turn to anyone who offered them a helping hand; and for the time being, for him and perhaps for most Vietnamese, it was China, and the kuomintang, not surprisingly, which exerted the greatest influence on the development of Vietnamese nationalism: and especially a Kuomintang which still included communists as well as nationalists.
Phan Boi Chau ended his life wondering whether the Vietnamese people understood communism any more than he did himself; but even if, in the 1920s, they did not, and if international communism at least did not understand the Vietnamese people all that well either, one could argue that at a time when the prospects for Vietnam were still fairly evenly balanced between peaceful reform and revolution and even though , in 1924, a government of the Left had taken office in France, the failure of a constitutional Party helped to turn political forces in Vietnam in the direction of a radical nationalism.
At one point, in December 1925, with a liberal Governor-General in Vietnam, the Vietnamese were told that they could aspire to a fuller and higher life to become one day a nation; but a few months later it was predicted that, while an independent Vietnam (in the indeterminate future) was a possibility, the bonds between it and France would become sufficiently strong so that nothing would ever break them.
It was obvious that France was determined to keep the lid on.
It was becoming equally obvious that, with the build-up of pressure, some sort of explosion was likely.
The original explosion had come in Petrograd in 1917.
After this it was, for Bolsheviks, a moot point whether revolution in Europe would mean independence for the colonies, as Trotsky believed; or whether, as Marx had originally argued and Stalin now suggested, colonial  revolution, particularly in Asia, could hasten the overthrow of European capitalism.
When the Second Congress of the Communist International met in 1920 the basic query, says McLane, was how much attention was to be paid to the East.
And whether it was to be considered more important than the West.
As rapporteur of the Commission which was considering national and colonial questions, Lenin made it clear it was essential to achieve the closest alliance of all national and colonial liberation movements with Soviet Russia: indeed the former were learning from bitter experience that their only salvation lay in alliance with the revolutionary proletariat and in the triumph of Soviet power over world imperialism.
And yet, on the matter of whether the colonial or the metropolitan revolution had priority, the statement was equivocal.
On the one hand it was essential to try to make the peasant movement more revolutionary in character by uniting the peasants and all the exploited, wherever possible, into Soviets; on the other, the obligation to render the most active assistance to revolutionary-liberation movements rested in the first instance with the workers of the country on which the backward nation was colonially and financially dependent.
Making concessions to Lenin's Indian and ‘Asia-First’ opponent, M N Roy, the Commission had, throughout the theses, replaced ‘bourgeois-democratic’by ‘revolutionary’and the result was, as one may see in the sixth thesis, that the revolutionary-liberation movement in backward countries or among backward nationalities was invited to determine what forms this alliance should take.
Specific targets were to include landlords, large-scale landholders, the reactionary and mediaeval influence of the clergy and Christian missions, and all manifestations or survivals of feudalism.
HO CHI MINH
Even though, by 1920, the world revolution was notably behind schedule the prospect for revolutionaries, national or communist, of alliance with Soviet power in the struggle against world imperialism was dazzling.
And for the self-styled Vietnamese patriot, reading these theses in Paris in the French Communist paper l'Humanité , it amounted, in his own account, to a religious conversion.
It also approximated, in time, to the formation of the French Communist Party, of which Ho Chi Minh was a founder member, and one may, conveniently and conventionally, present him as a communist from 1920 onwards.
The nationalist goes back much earlier, even though, as one of his biographers says, ‘Everything that touches on his life  until 1941 is fragmentary, approximate and controversial.
Born, apparently, in 1890 in Nghe An province of central Vietnam, Ho's father was at least an acquaintance if not friend of the veteran nationalist Phan Boi Chau.
His uncle, sister, and brother can all be described as nationalists and although Ho seems to have been attracted at one point to the China of the 1911 Revolution, he chose instead to make his way to France where, having led an intellectually enriched but materially impoverished existence in Paris, he achieved some fame, or notoriety, among his fellow expatriates by attempting to present a list of Vietnamese grievances to Woodrow Wilson and the European statesmen who had gathered in 1919 at Versailles.
When he made what may be argued were his next intellectually significant appearances, in 1923 at the Peasant International and in 1924 at the Fifth Congress of the Communist International, he had moved on from the French Communist Party and was now accepted in Russia as a revolutionary of considerable promise.
But the matter of priorities had still to be settled and Ho threw his weight unmistakably behind the primacy of colonial revolution.
He told the delegates: ‘All of you know that at present the poison and vital capacity of the imperialist viper are concentrated in the colonies rather than in the metropolitan countries.’
And yet, he said, hearing the speeches of comrades from France and Britain he had the impression that they all wanted to kill the serpent by beating its tail.
As Ho and other communists noted, amongst the European proletariat the issue of colonial emancipation was very much an also-ran in the 1920s; and even after a bona fide Vietnamese communist party had been formed, it was just as irksome to them to have to accept the tutelage of the French Communist Party.
It was not in fact until ten years after Ho's conversion to communism that the Indochina Communist Party itself was formed in 1930.
In the meantime Ho's contribution to the cause continued to be made from outside Vietnam and most effectively, from Canton.
His appointment to the staff of the Borodin mission to the Kuomintang in 1924 brought him into contact with hundreds of young Vietnamese for whom Canton was the centre of Chinese nationalism; and communism which, at this time, was still included in the Kuomintang.
When the Vietnamese Revolutionary Youth League was formed by Ho in 1925 its nucleus consisted of Vietnamese terrorists, the Tam Tam Xa , who had already attempted the assassination of a French Governor-General on a state visit to Canton, and Canton became a staging-post for the return of young Vietnamese revolutionaries who might now declare themselves to be Marxists as well.
What Ho himself understood by Marxism at this stage can perhaps best be seen in the first Vietnamese Marxist revolutionary text:The Road to Revolution , published in 1926.
While the idea of the  two-stage revolution: liberation first, communism later: could be described as primitive Leninism, it may be seen that Ho's approach to Communism was also two-track: town and country: not necessarily in that order: and his Revolutionary Youth League also functioned on two levels: the mass nationalist party and the inner core of Tam Tam Xa hotheads who were to be the nucleus of a future communist party.
In its promotion of conjoint nationalism and communism the League resembled the Kuomintang at this time: and it lasted only as long as the Kuomintang managed to contain the two movements.
In addition to their ideological training, many Vietnamese also attended the Whampoa Military Academy in Canton where they were instructed by, among others, Chiang Kai Shek.
By the time Chiang fell upon his Chinese communist rivals and destroyed the Canton commune in the spring of 1927, and thus terminated the League's existence also, it has been estimated that something like 200 ‘graduates’ of Ho's Canton course had returned to Vietnam and although many of them were arrested, it was a significant infusion to be added to what might be called the natural sources of discontent.
In Tonkin it has been suggested that the majority of young revolutionaries belonged to the working class: but that the party machine generally was composed predominantly of teachers and intellectuals.
If this is so then it was probably less of a proletarian organization than its principal rival, the Nationalist Party, or, in its fuller title, the Vietnam Quoc Dan Dang .
This was a party which, created in 1927, reckoned to be the Vietnamese counterpart of the Chinese Nationalists who were now untainted by communist membership of the Kuomintang.
To confuse the issue, however, the VNQDD was apparently conceived ‘as a vanguard party, an adaptation of the Bolshevik model in Indo-China, and to that extent it reflected the impact of Marxism’.
As a party it is described, variously, as characterized by its insurrectionary mentality and always hovering on the brink of insurrection.
As a vanguard, in spite of one or two sensational assassinations, it was not going to get very far unless and until it managed to co-ordinate widespread resistance to the French.
To some extent both it and its communist rivals were able to take advantage of increasing misery and frustration once the effects of the world economic depression were felt.
Wages fell; export markets collapsed; and, perversely, because the Vietnamese piastre was now linked to the metropolitan franc, the cost of living rose.
The VNODD as well as the communists had already been involved in fomenting strikes but on the whole they do not seem to have attached themselves to any cause other than nationalism and, while they were particularly active in attempting to subvert the army, when they finally and out of desperation, having been heavily penetrated by the Sûreté, attempted to begin their armed struggle, many of the Vietnamese riflemen in the battalion, which was induced to mutiny, rallied instead to their French officers.
ABORTIVE REVOLUTION
The Yen-Bay mutiny did not, as it was intended, form part of a co-ordinated attack on the French position in Vietnam and in the event it turned into disaster for the VNQDD.
French repression, including aerial bombardment, was unsparing and as a result of wholesale arrests and executions they were practically wiped out.
Almost incredibly a month later, the Communist Party attempted a repeat performance.
Or, at least, it attempted to capitalize on similar conditions in other parts of the country.
It was, now, a single if not entirely united party.
It had been born out of a clandestine meeting in Hong Kong in February 1930 at a time which there were in fact three communist parties in Vietnam.
The unifying factor was Ho Chi Minh, acting as agent of the Comintern, and while it would not manage to suppress its nationalist tendencies indefinitely it was for the moment clearly identified with the Vietnamese working class.
Who they were, and whether the party's appeal should be confined to the quarter of a million or so who might be described as ‘proletariat’ was something that had yet to be defined.
In the meantime, in the turmoil of Vietnam in 1930 and perhaps remembering Lenin's rather ambiguous call for soviets, the Party committed itself to what was essentially an agrarian revolt.
The Soviets of Nghe-Tinh are, obviously, one of the first landmarks of Vietnamese communism.
There was a ‘worker’ element but for the most part it was a peasant revolt, described in James Scott's study of rebellion and subsistence in Southeast Asia as one of the ‘Depression rebellions’of 1930.
But if not initiated by the Communist Party it was at least orchestrated by them although, as Scott notes, the destruction of land and tax records was virtually a peasant tradition in colonial Vietnam.
A simple cause was the fact that, in the words of one observer, ‘For two years the land has produced nothing’.
This, plus tax demands and a steady loss of communal land to corrupt mandarins and village notables, would seem to have been enough to produce this peasant revolt in whose heartland both Phan Boi Chau and Ho Chi Minh had been born.
The aftermath was even worse than Yen-Bay; 2,000 dead and the virtual destruction or disintegration of the existing party apparatus.
From Ho Chi Minh, however, it was a matter on which apparently no opinion was ever recorded and it may serve to illustrate the dangers to which communism in Vietnam was exposed when decisions and even understanding were subject to foreign direction.
By its insistence on the generalized imminence of revolution — more an article of faith than a result of pragmatic observation — the Comintern was at least partly responsible for the Nghe-Tinh disaster.
Conceivably, if the revolt had spread to take in substantial parts of the country then, to anticipate Maoist precepts of the future, the countryside would have surrounded the cities; but at this time not only were there no ‘sympathetic detonations’ in other parts of the country but there was practically no challenge whatever to French power in the cities.
And although he was not directly involved in the Nghe-Tinh debâcle, one may assume that, Ho, too, had ‘overestimated the capacity of the communist leadership to transform spontaneous revolt into a nationwide uprising, and had underestimated the ability of the colonial regime to quell any challenge to its authority’.
Whoever had taken the decision to commit the party to armed insurrection in 1930, what was now to be called in question was whether the party had any right at all to make such decisions for itself.
During his time in Paris Ho Chi Minh had discovered that the French proletariat was not totally committed to the cause of Vietnamese independence: indeed the problems of France's colonies were much less immediate than their own.
Nevertheless, it was the French Communist Party which had been given the task of encouraging communism in Vietnam; and, it appears, where necessary, correcting its faults.
In this it may have been little more than a mouthpiece for a Russian directorate but in an article, which, says Sacks, amounted to a reading of the riot act to the ICP, one finds this clear and unmistakable instruction in the French journal Cahiers du Boishévisme :
If they [the Vietnamese comrades]find that certain points in the programme do not fit the concrete situation of the country, they can ask the Comintern to add or subtract something.
But if they allow themselves to correct the party programme of action elaborated by the Comintern without asking its opinion, such action is incompatible with the principle of democratic centralism, with iron discipline, and with the Comintern.
Similar advice was apparently given by the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, i.e. that ‘the gate to victory is a disciplined and powerful Bolshevik Party’ and it goes without saying that in Stalin's Russia deviation by small and not exactly successful communist parties abroad was not encouraged.
On the whole, during what Duiker has called ‘the Stalinist years’, this was something that was accepted by the Vietnamese Communist Party but one can imagine that it was not always so easy to accept the advice which came to them from their French comrades.
Thus, the French Communist Party leader Maurice Thorez explaining that, while French colonies of course had a right of self determination, they did not need to exercise it.
Calling on Lenin for support he claimed that the interests of French colonies, including the Indochinese, were best served by a ‘free, trusting and paternal union with France’.
When the Popular Front, including the French Communist Party, came to power in France in June 1936 there was at least the hope  that, by their actions, significant improvements, political as well as economic and social, might be achieved in Vietnam.
But if, as Thorez implied, the Vietnamese and French Communist Parties should work together, would it not mean that the campaign for national liberation would have to be abandoned?
Moreover, not only would Vietnamese interests be subordinate to those of France but the French Communist Party in turn was expected to follow a policy which was subordinate to that of international communism: in a word, Comintern policy.
If the Comintern, too, decided that the anti-fascist coalition would be weakened in Vietnam by national independence, itself something of a bourgeois concept, and if the Indochina Communist Party followed suit, no matter how reluctantly, it would at a stroke lose a very significant part of its political appeal.
Not that the national cause formed the only basis of the Party's support and it seems that by 1937 or so something like 600 action committees had been formed to organize the workers in Cochinchina, principally in the Saigon — Cholon area.
Ironically, it was here, says Sacks, that he Trotskyists were most active and most effective and their significant increase in strength may at least in part be attributed to a sense of frustration and anger with the ICP who had, willingly or not, abandoned the cause of independence.
Nevertheless the Trotskyists themselves split, on the issue of whether or not to co-operate with the ICP, and, just as the VNQDD had been destroyed as a competitor with the Communist Party by French repression after Yen-Bay, so the French colonial government, shortly after war had begun in 1939, rounded up virtually the entire leadership of the Trotskyist International Communist League, as it was then called: a coup from which the movement never recovered.
PATRIOTISM AND THE PEASANTRY
From the experience of the 1920s and 1930s, therefore, it would appear that there was nothing overwhelmingly certain about the success of communism in Vietnam or, at least, about the success of the Indochina Communist Party.
But the French had not managed to divert or to accommodate the forces of nationalism.
The nationalists as a party capable of national leadership — that is to say the VNQDD — had admittedly been destroyed but while the ICP was not much better off the difference was that the VNQDD never really recovered from French repression.
The ICP did.
Their resilience and in part fortuitous revival may have been due to the slightly more permissive policies of the Popular Front government in Paris — thousands of political  prisoners were released although thousands more remained in gaol — but much more seems to have been the result of the ability to rebuild an organization from the bottom up even though the advice and instructions they received from international communism meant acquiescence in policies which did not give them pre-eminent appeal as a revolutionary party.
In all of this Ho Chi Minh is to be seen bobbing about like a cork on the tides of international communism, sometimes lost from sight for long periods, surviving life in Stalin's Russia and the manifest uncertainties of the purges and, when war broke out, still remaining as an experienced if not entirely successful figure in the communist world and a distant although still immanent leader of Vietnamese communism.
The almost immediate effect of the outbreak of war in 1939, following the almost entirely unexpected Nazi-Soviet pact, was that the Communist party, in France as in Vietnam, announced its opposition to the ‘imperialist’ war and, in both countries, this was followed by swift government repression.
Even before the collapse of France in June 1940 was to provide the Vietnamese communists with their golden opportunity, the Sixth Plenum meeting in November 1939 was looking towards national liberation in the foreseeable future as France's efforts and resources were obviously being diverted to maintain her position in Europe.
Once again the Party was preparing for armed struggle and the stunning German victory of 1940 would have appeared to many Vietnamese to be ‘the moment of great opportunity’.
In the event, when insurrections were attempted both in the area of Lang Son, on the Chinese border, in September, and in Cochinchina in November, they were repressed with little difficulty by the French colonial government which still deployed enough effective power to ensure that these were rather rash, forlorn, and certainly premature insurrections.
The following year, however, the Party took what was perhaps its most momentous decision in the mountains a few miles south of the Chinese border.
In the history of the Vietnamese communist movement, as Duiker says, the Eighth Plenum is traditionally regarded as the moment when nationalism and a rural strategy of people's war became identified as the two pillars of Vietnamese revolutionary doctrine.
It is no less important in that it marked the return of Ho Chi Minh to Indochina after an absence of 30 years.
Ho and the Indochina Communist Party had literally, and once again, found each other .
Since about 1938 Ho had been in China, first at the communist headquarters in Yenan then, apparently, with Chinese Nationalist forces, finally in Kwangsi and Yunnan which were close enough for him to attempt to resume contact with the Party inside Vietnam.
At about the same time the Party was attempting to make contact with him and finally did so in the persons of two of its eventually outstanding members, Vo Nguyen Giap and Pham Van Dong.
Now, at Pac Bo, under Ho's chairmanship, the Party cleared its ideological decks and prepared to take advantage of the even more extraordinary opportunities that would be presented to it by the Second World War.
This, in fact, was the theme of the Eighth Plenum: to prepare for the thoi co , ‘the moment of great opportunity’.
Instead of class analysis and the more obvious communist objectives the Party was to advance on a broad front as the dominant power of the League For The Independence Of Vietnam: the Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong Minh or, in its more memorable form, the Vietminh .
Ho's appeal in his ‘Letter From Abroad’ was comprehensive: ‘rich people, soldiers, workers, peasants, intellectuals, employees, traders, youth and women who warmly love your country!’.
National liberation was the most important problem and the opportunity had come.
It was time ‘to follow the historic example set by our forefathers in the glorious task of national salvation’.
If the patriotic appeal was designed to be all-embracing, the platform of support was obviously narrower.
In its flight from the French security services once the war in Europe had broken out, the Party had, if only inadvertently, operationalized its interest in the peasantry; if only for the fact that, in leaving the towns, they were now living amongst them.
Hitherto it had largely been a matter of intellectual interest and the best-known example was the study of the The Peasant Question (1937 — 1938 ) by two of the Party's foremost members, Truong Chinh and Vo Nguyen Giap.
The inference that was clearly to be drawn from their study was that land reform/land redistribution was the critical factor in the peasant problem: even if the peasants' lot could be improved by less drastic means.
When it was first published in 1937–38 the authors had suggested points in the colonial government's peasant policy which might have been reformed —‘landlord rent oppression’, the seizure of peasant land, heavy taxation — but the French response, apparently, was to ban the work after the second volume had been published.
In class terms the peasants were identified as part of the rural petty bourgeoisie: generally speaking, not members of the proletariat because they usually owned some means of production to support themselves.
In spite of an apparent natural distaste for many of the customs and superstitions of peasant society the most important discovery was of their revolutionary potential.
Whenever they become conscious, or organized and have leadership,they are an invincible force .
When they are ready they will flatten any obstacle to their progress and that of the nation.
The whole problem is consciousness, organization and leadership .
Essentially, the long-term problem of mobilizing the peasantry, as of mobilizing Vietnam with its 90 per cent peasant population, was one  on which the success of the Vietnamese revolution would eventually turn.
In the shorter term, the kaleidoscope of the Second World War was going to accelerate the process and would present opportunities both for independence and revolution.
To begin with, however, the moment of opportunity that was presented in Vietnam by France's defeat in 1940 was taken by the Japanese; and although Ho might conceivably and eventually have been right in his optimistic assertion that ‘if the entire people were united and single minded they would certainly be able to smash the picked French and Japanese armies’, the vicissitudes of war and politics would ensure that, for a while at least, they would not be required for such a formidable task.
Having been engaged in an undeclared war with China since 1937 Japan took advantage of the French defeat in 1940 both to close one of China's last remaining links with the outside world, the Haiphong — Yunnan railway, and to begin her advance into Southeast Asia.
Those of the French, the majority, who at least implicitly gave their allegiance to Vichy France, were prepared for a wary collaboration with the Japanese and as Admiral Decoux, the French Governor-General appointed by Marshal pétain, always maintained, they were determined, no matter what happened in France, to preserve the French position in Indochina.
Implicitly, it may be argued, this turned them into collaborators with the Japanese; although the latter, for their part, were content to maintain the superstructure of French administration even if, as events were subsequently to show, the realities of power were theirs.
Did this mean therefore that in some way France had forfeited her position in Indochina and was she to be treated as an opponent rather than an ally?
The question at the time, in May 1941, when the Vietminh was founded and Ho was talking bravely about taking on the combined French and Japanese armies in Vietnam was, of course, anachronistic: the two principal Allied powers had not yet entered the war.
When Hitler invaded Russia in June 1941 and the war, for communists, abruptly changed its character, there was at least the prospect — in principle at least— of enhanced support for the revolutionary and patriotic cause in Vietnam; but until Russia had withstood the German onslaught this in practical terms meant nothing.
In the meantime it was the Japanese attack on the US which would prove to have the most rewarding consequences as far as the Vietminh were concerned.
One may indeed go so far as to assert that the Japanese occupation of Indochina was the key issue in the conflict between Japan and the US which led to the attack at Pearl Harbor; and after what was, initially, a rather lofty approach to the problems of Indochina and Southeast Asian security, America's final demand that Japan remove its forces from both China and Indochina (26 November 1941) was met with the equally final Japanese rejection which manifested itself at Pearl Harbor and the invasion of Southeast Asia.
American entry into the war had the effect of a second transformation.
No matter what reservations Churchill might have entertained about the Atlantic Charter and whether or not freedom was meant to apply to colonial territories, the unworthiness of France to return to Indochina was soon to become one of Roosevelt's fixed ideas on colonialism and an issue that would bedevil relations between all the Allied powers in Southeast Asia with the possible and ironic exception of the Soviet Union.
At least Churchill is on record that Roosevelt had been more outspoken with him on the subject of Indochina than on any other colonial matter: ‘I imagine it is one of his principal war aims to liberate Indochina from France’.
And while Roosevelt was to some extent restrained by the State Department and, even more, after the US had recognized de Gaulle's government in October, 1944, by considerations of reconstituting France as at least a European power, there was, on the operational level, a situation developing in southern China, in which the US was involved, which would affect the fortunes of the Vietnamese revolutionaries, their appearance, their standing with other Vietnamese patriots, and their ability to influence future events.
Shortly after the US had entered the war Ho's personal fortunes had reached their lowest ebb.
Having returned to China to work in and among the numerous but fragmented Vietnamese independence factions, Ho's position as an acknowledged communist in what was an essentially anti-communist Kuomintang was always precarious and for whatever reason he was imprisoned (in conditions of great hardship) it seems likely that he had been close to the point of death before he was released thirteen months later: Chen suggests because of communist sympathisers in the local Kuomintang hierarchy.
As a matter of self-preservation, he changed his name from ‘Nguyen the Patriot’(Nguyen Ai Quoc) to ‘He who enlightens’(Ho Chi Minh): the name by which he is immortalized.
CHINA AND THE UNITED STATES: SPONSORS OF VIETNAMESE INDEPENDENCE
Part, at least, of Ho's enlightenment was the approximation and future projection of political power in Vietnam, the need to maintain the appeal to Vietnamese patriotism, and, most of all, a temporary but overwhelming necessity for Chinese support.By the rime Ho had been released by the Chinese in September 1943 the US was beginning to make its major contribution to the war against Japan and various strategies were being considered for a drive on Canton or Hanoi.
In either case principally Chinese armies would  have been involved and, in the short run at least, Vietnam's political future seemed to lie in Chinese hands.
The Chinese, for their part, needed reliable intelligence on conditions in Vietnam — some genuine Vietnamese support, too, if they could get it — but not simply that which was promised by  émigrés who had lived in China for years and who had little or no contact with or contemporary knowledge of Vietnam.
While he was in Chinese captivity, and apart from writing poems in classical Chinese (some of which, while they may not have been of the highest order classically, are nevertheless moving and rather beautiful) Ho had also translated Dr Sun Yat Sen's modern political classic the San Min Chu I into Vietnamese and this expedient flattery of China and Chinese continued after Ho's release.
Although admitting to the Kuomintang General Chang Fa-k'uei that he was a communist, he apparently persuaded him that it would take fifty years for communism to work in Vietnam; and, in any event, it appeared that, of all the groupings of Vietnamese nationalists, patriots, émigrés and revolutionaries who were to be found in Southeast China, none of them was as dynamic as the Vietminh.
When the Chinese made their first attempt, in preparation for the invasion of Indo-China, to bring the various Vietnamese factions together and create a Vietnamese Revolutionary League (abbreviated to Dong Minh Hoi ) members of the ICP were specifically excluded.
Eighteen months later, in March 1944, at a second Chinese-sponsored conference at Liuchow, Ho had not only  managed to slip back under the nationalist umbrella of the Dong Minh Hoi but, as one of its representatives, was named as a member of a Provisional Government which was expecting to enter Vietnam in the wake of the ‘liberating’ Chinese armies.
At this point, then, the Chinese were the indispensable sponsors of Vietnamese independence and Ho himself is supposed to have assured them that he would work under their auspices and as a member of what might be described as the Vietnamese patriotic front.
In China, at this time, Ho and his communist supporters were only one among rival groups of Vietnamese nationalists.
In Vietnam, they were probably pre-eminent and could certainly lay the largest claim to ‘control’ of operational areas on the other side of the Chinese frontier in Tonkin even though their simultaneous claim to the status of ‘resistance’forces needs to be looked at more closely.
In August 1944, having enlisted Chinese support, Ho crossed the border into north Vietnam to make contact once again with the Vietminh forces who, by this time, and in the absence of any other administrative control or military power, were extending their influence in the mountains of northern Tonkin in the area known as the Viet Bac Revolutionary armed forces were supposed to be growing and there was apparently enough revolutionary enthusiasm to support the idea of launching another insurrection from there within a couple of months.
Ho, cautiously, turned down such a premature example  of left-wing adventurism and instead, and as a bridge between the political and military phases of the revolutionary struggle, the first armed propaganda unit was set up in the mountains of Cao Bang — and was to have primarily political duties.
THE JAPANESE COUP
At the time Ho was discouraging thoughts of instant insurrection on the part of the Vietminh it was obvious that as far as French fortunes were concerned the wind had changed.
Rather ingenuously it appears that, with the liberation of Paris, the French in Vietnam asked for Japanese permission to celebrate the event; and it must have been obvious to the Japanese, too, that the uneasy but de facto alignment between them and the French was liable to break down sooner or later.
For de Gaulle, apparently, the sooner the better and, although this may be straining the comparison, on the analogy of Badoglio's Italy, the French in Vietnam might at least have been allowed to work their passage towards the status of a fully fledged ally rather than endure the uncomfortable ambiguities of a compromised position.
According to his memoirs de Gaulle willingly envisaged that hostilities would commence in Indochina: ‘French blood shed on Indo-Chinese soil would give us an important voice…since I did not harbour the least doubt as to Japan's ultimate aggression, I desired that our troops should fight, no matter how desperate their situation.’
When, however, the hostilities did begin, for most Frenchmen they ended, ignominiously, with imprisonment by the Japanese while for those in the north who together with their Vietnamese riflemen fought the Japanese with exemplary heroism, dying in beleaguered garrisons or making a fighting retreat to the Chinese border, their fate precipitated the most unpleasant or at least the most unfortunate disagreement between the Allies.
By the time of the Japanese coup on 9 March 1945 the US had already become an important actor in the play that was to determine the future of Vietnam.
A large part of the trouble lay in the overlapping and by no means clearly defined responsibilities for operations in Vietnam between US forces operating in support of the Chinese in the ‘China Theater’, and Southeast Asia Command: more particularly, the disagreements between the US General Wedemeyer and Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten.
Although his attitude towards the French seemed to change somewhat before he died, Roosevelt had effectively delayed the French in their attempt to return to Indochina.
Whether or not his opinions actually percolated down to subordinate commanders many of them seemed to share his beliefs about keeping  the French out, or at least, in an interesting reversal of roles in the First World War, treating France as an associated rather than an allied power.
Small numbers of French had been parachuted into Indochina under SEAC auspices before the Japanese coup but a much larger and perhaps more effective intervention by the French Corps Léger d'Intervention,a specialist unit of some five hundred men recruited and waiting in Algeria, was frustrated for various nominal reasons; the effective one being that the US, until the very last moment, was unalterably opposed to French units participating in the war against Japan, and especially, if this involved Vietnam.
The result, in the aftermath of the Japanese coup, was that immediate help to the French, who were now fighting the Japanese in Vietnam, was denied to them at a time when the US 14th Airforce in southern China could be seen by the French in Laos and Vietnam as they flew on their predetermined attacks on the Japanese elsewhere in Southeast Asia.
It would, of course, be far fetched to compare the plight of the French fighting the Japanese in Vietnam with that of the Polish Home Army who had been destroyed fighting the Germans in Warsaw in 1944 although, in one respect at least , the failure of the proximate military power to lend assistance meant that others, who were more responsive to the plight of the Poles and the French, did what they could from a distance to help.
Again, in the case of Vietnam, this was accompanied by bitter political acrimony, at least on the operational level, between the Americans on the one side, the British and French on the other, about whether or not the French fighting in Vietnam were to be regarded as allies and whether or not the French had any entitlement to resume their pre-war position in Indochina.
Although it was not appreciated at the time when the Japanese swept away the administration, the power and the remaining claims to sovereignty of the French in Indochina, the Second World War in Asia had entered its final six months.
In this period, and before the events which may be described as ‘the August Revolution’, there were in retrospect, at least two others which assume a momentous character.
The first was that on 11 March 1945, two days after the Japanese coup, the Emperor Bao Dai proclaimed ‘That from today the protectorate treaty with France is abrogated and that the country reassumes its rights to independence’.
It was of course a somewhat limited independence with the government of Vietnam announcing its trust in the loyalty of Japan and considering itself to be part of Japanese Greater East Asia.
It was also limited in the sense that the Japanese appointed a Governor of Cochinchina, a resident-superior of Tonkin and advisers to Annam, Cambodia and Laos.
Nevertheless it had broken the thread by which the country had been tied to France and although it might be claimed that, as in Burma during the war or in Indonesia at the end of the war, it was a spurious independence and  part of Japanese mischief making, nevertheless Vietnam was now in a formal sense independent if not exactly free.
The French, too, responded to the Japanese coup with a formal declaration of their intentions for Vietnam.
To some extent perhaps they were the victims of their own official attitude to what was happening — as when the French Ambassador in London told Eden that a French civil and military resistance organization in Vietnam had the general support of the army and the civil population: whether this was the French or the Vietnamese population was apparently not specified — but in their Declaration of 24 March 1945 the Provisional French Government implied that all the peoples of Indochina were fighting for a common cause; which was that of the entire French community.
It was thus acquiring additional rights ‘to receive the place for which it is destined’ but instead of independence, there was the rather less exciting prospect of an Indochinese Federation which would ‘enjoy the liberty and the organization necessary to the development of all its resources’.
Not only was France here, and on many subsequent occasions, unable to pronounce the word ‘independence’.
On this occasion she did not even pronounce the name ‘Vietnam’.
It would, by implication, be one of five constituent parts of the Indochinese Federation — which meant that Vietnam itself would be divided into three parts — and they, together with other parts of what were called the ‘French Community’ would form a French Union.
The interests of the Indochinese Federation outside the Union would be represented by France.
Inside the Federation ‘in the interests of each the Governor-General would be arbiter of all’.
(As Irving points out it was, frankly, anachronistic; more or less what Edouard Daladier had demanded after the disturbances in Indochina in 1930.)
In any case the interests of Vietnam — or, one might say, the non-interest in Vietnam — had been subsumed and constrained in France's Brazzaville Declaration of January 1944 which said, unequivocally,
Whereas the aims of the work of civilization accomplished by France in her colonies rule out all idea of autonomy and all possibility of development outside the French Empire;[therefore]the eventual constitution, even in the far off future, of self-government in the colonies is out of the question.
As the most advanced part of the French colonial empire Vietnam in 1945 might, perhaps, by a sort of inductive leap, have been the first French colony to become independent.
In hindsight, that is.
At the time, however, in France it was practically unthinkable and one may surmise that while France itself might have recovered from the débâcle of 1940 there was added point to her recovery of Vietnam after the humiliation and tragedy of March 1945.
One may also argue that the situation was increasingly beyond her control.
In Vietnam the loss of a small intelligence network to the Japanese had made it essential for operational purposes that it should be replaced and it is at this point that Ho Chi Minh and the American OSS found each other.
The practical services rendered by each side to the other do not seem to have been all that large although there is still considerable speculation about the volume of weapons with which the Vietminh were supplied.
Of equal importance, it can be argued, to the Vietminh cause was the half-dozen Colt 45s which Ho had obtained from US sources, together with a signed photograph of the US 14th Airforce Commander, General Chennault.
Charles Fenn, the American OSS agent whose instructions were to disregard Franco-Vietnamese politics and re-establish an intelligence rescue network, reckons that the three months after the Japanese coup were perhaps the most significant in Ho's career.
Divergent political objectives notwithstanding, the obvious goodwill between Ho and the Americans, the limited but successful training teams that they provided for Vietminh guerrillas, and the obvious sympathy which many Americans — in particular, it seems the OSS — had for the cause of Vietnamese independence, not to mention corresponding doubts of the French title to Vietnam, all of these understandably encouraged the Vietminh in their political objective of the accomplished fact.
As Truong Chinh is said to have told the ‘People's Congress’ in August ‘We must wrest power from the hands of the Japanese and their stooges before the arrival of the Allies in Indo-China, and, as masters of the country, we shall receive the Allies who come to disarm the Japanese.’
THE AUGUST REVOLUTION
In his biography of Ho Chi Minh, David Halberstam says that Ho realized what few others did: that it would all derive from August 1945.
‘For it was then that the Vietminh had in one quick stroke taken over the nationalism of the country, that Ho had achieved the legitimacy of power.’
The ‘nationalism of the country’ would seem to be an acceptable figure of speech but in practice it was centred on Hanoi.
Twelve months earlier, when Paris had been liberated, communist members of the Resistance in France had wanted to strike before the French army and de Gaulle arrived and thus present them with an accomplished fact.
Such a capture of French nationalism would probably have been impossible in Paris; but, in Hanoi, circumstances were combining to make it a reality.
At least, in those extraordinary days between Hiroshima and the  declaration of Vietnamese independence, hardly anyone, except the French garrison who were still imprisoned, first by the Japanese and then by the Vietminh, could be found to contradict this assumption of power and by the time it took place, or at least was claimed, another thread in the French connection had been broken.
On 25 August 1945 the Emperor Bao Dai had abdicated.
At the point of a gun, says one author but not according to Bao Dai himself.
‘The people’, he said, ‘possess a very sure instinct which, in historic hours, conducts them towards those whose mission it is to guide them.
The Vietminh had seemed to bring it off as if by a miracle.
Was not their incontestable success the sign that they had received the mandate of heaven?’
Even before Bao Dai's abdication, his nominal government which had taken office after the Japanese coup, had resigned.
Instead of government there were now centres of power; and it was to one of these, in Hanoi, that Bao Dai addressed his reply to the Vietminh.
Not knowing their address, he says, he addressed it simply to ‘The Committee of Patriots’.
For Ho Chi Minh, formerly ‘Nguyen the Patriot’, it was an accolade that corresponded to reality but of all the ‘objective circumstances’ which might be held to account for even a temporary communist victory in August 1945 at least the most striking and immediate was the political vacuum into which they moved.
The general insurrection was proclaimed on 14 August by the Central Committee of the Vietminh.
It was, they said, the moment for the people to rise up in arms and obtain independence, and even though this begged the question against whom they would use these arms, there was no doubt, as the Central Committee said, that it was a moment of exceptional opportunity.
A fortnight later they announced themselves as the Provisional Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and a few days after that, on 2 September, as the climax to weeks of stupendous political demonstrations, Vietnam declared its independence.
How had it been achieved?
In what sense was it a reality?
Perhaps, and perhaps contentiously, it was because the general insurrection had not taken place at this time: at least not in the sense that it involved trial by battle.
What had been happening was an assumption of power on the part of the Vietminh and the demonstration that a communist party could seize the opportunity to capitalize on the power of nationalism at a moment of unparalleled opportunity.
Like Leclerc's forces waiting outside Paris in 1944, Giap's forces hurrying towards Hanoi in August 1945 discovered that the city was in the process of liberating itself.
But the appearance of Giap's armed guerrillas marching in more or less regular military formation seemed to confirm that, already, the Resistance had won.
The spectacle of tiny little Vietnamese dressed in boy scout uniforms, even though they may have been ‘Vanguard Youth’, carrying placards  bigger than they were which said ‘Independence or Death’ was just another element in the enthusiasm which can equally well be described as revolutionary nationalism or national revolution.
Was it, because it was orchestrated by the Communist Party, invalid?
Certainly, there were examples of transparent deception: for example, when, as proof of their transcendental patriotism, the ICP dissolved itself and announced it had become the Association for Marxist Studies.
It was also obvious that the Vietminh were running rings around the rather remote and ineffectual nationalist parties who had appeared, as it were, as returning  émigrés in the baggage train of the occupying Chinese armies: although nominal partners in the great enterprise of securing national independence the nationalists were in reality excluded from any partnership in a coalition government.
Much of the success, perhaps, was due to superb stage management, as in the organization of demonstrations, but the fact that the Vietminh emerged as leaders of Vietnamese nationalism may be attributed to their sheer ability as a revolutionary party.
Under this heading one must include a capacity for malevolent violence which, in Duiker's rather chilling and non-committal words meant that where power was seized, people's liberation committees were established and ‘class enemies were punished’.
In many places there were at least elements of spontaneity and although Duiker compares it with Trotsky's description of the Bolshevik revolution as, for the most part, being a ‘revolution by telegraph’, Khanh says that most places acted without instructions from the Central Committee.
Where revolutionary committees existed much of their impetus reflected the organizing ability of the party which, by capitalizing on the natural and man-made disasters of flood and terrible famine which may have left at least a million dead, and on Vietminh seizure and distribution of rice from guarded granaries, was able to discredit existing authority, both French and Japanese.
The number of their supporters, if not activists, was enormously enhanced by the way in which the Vichy régime had mobilized the country's youth in patriotic but hitherto innocuous associations which now underpinned the revolution, perhaps even to the point where youth was as critical a factor in the Vietnamese revolution as it was, at the same time, in Indonesia.
Another factor of immense importance was the widespread availability of arms; but to understand how and why these became available one must first look, as Ho did, at the balance of international forces which had created this moment of opportunity.
Here, as was done at Potsdam in July 1945, one may divide Vietnam into north and south.
For Truman, Stalin, and Churchill it was an operational decision so that the Chinese armies could operate in the north and SEAC forces in the south.
Hardly anyone had expected the Japanese to surrender quite so quickly and, when they did and for the moment, as far as the Allies were concerned, hardly anything happened.
It  was this temporal hiatus, as much as anything, which allowed the Vietminh to assume power, particularly in the north, but when the Kuomintang Chinese armies of occupation moved in, nominally to take the surrender of Japanese troops but in fact to remove almost everything of value that was portable, they existed side by side in fruitful collaboration.
That is to say, although the Chinese did not recognize the new People's Republic, the Vietminh assumption of power was not challenged.
It may be said, then, that it is China who again, and at this point, determined the fortunes of Vietnam.
In exchange for large quantities of the only acceptable currency, gold, the Chinese armies also provided considerable quantities of their own weapons, presumably surplus to requirements, and were less than meticulous in their recovery of weapons from the Japanese armouries.
From all this, as from Potsdam and Yalta, the French were absent.
To all intents and purposes, that is, because although the French garrison in Hanoi was still there it was imprisoned in the citadel and guarded, first by the Japanese, and then by the Vietminh.
When, after notable delays, the first Free French representative, Jean Sainteny, arrived in Hanoi from Kunming he had apparently already been informed by his travelling companion, Major Archimedes Patti of the American OSS, that as the  Potsdam agreement made no mention of French sovereignty over Vietnam the French therefore had no right to intervene in affairs which were no longer their concern.
For the time being at least this was almost exactly how the French were regarded by the Americans in Vietnam: of little or no account and if not exactly in the ‘out’ tray at best their position was ‘pending’.
In the meantime, genuine US sympathies for Vietnamese independence were much in evidence.
As it claimed to be the functioning government of Vietnam it was hardly surprising that US officers, particularly OSS, maintained fairly close contact with the Vietminh and perhaps there was a genuine basis for the American — Vietnamese Friendship Association; and when the senior US officer, General Gallagher, was persuaded to sing at one of their meetings and, apparently, broadcast on Vietminh radio, this too was in itself a comparatively innocent exercise.
Cumulatively, however, the aura of association with the US was of immense political benefit to those who called themselves a provisional government but who were still skating on the thin surface of political respectability and had by no means attained a state of acknowledged legitimacy.
As is now widely known, when, on 2 September, Ho Chi Minh made his declaration of Vietnamese independence, his opening and acknowledged quotation was from the American original.
What is less widely known is that at this moment two P-38 Lightnings,(distinctive, long-range US fighters) appeared, their star insignia clearly visible, and although it may have been coincidence even to the sophisticated in a crowd of  some hundreds of thousands it must indeed have appeared that the mandate of heaven had assumed its newest form.
CONFLICT IN THE SOUTH
As Ho Chi Minh presented the case the people who had fought side by side with the Allies, as well as against the French for more than eighty years, were entitled to their independence.
For the moment, in the north, it could be maintained by Chinese approval or at least complaisance and by keeping the French out.
In the south, it was to be a different story and with Vietminh claims recognized neither by the British/Indian forces who arrived first nor by the French who followed not long after, and with Japanese forces for the most part under much tighter control, the reassertion of French sovereignty, at least in so far as this might be done through the possession of Saigon, did not have long to wait.
General Gracey, who commanded the 20th Indian Division, has been presented as a no-nonsense sort of general.
For example, he was unimpressed by Vietminh claims to be the de facto government and to have resisted the Japanese; and for a while at least he believed, mistakenly, that they were in fact Japanese puppets.
He, no more than General Christison in Java, was able to operate in a political vacuum but at least the French in Saigon were treated as allies rather than as one-time enemies although, in the absence of sufficient numbers of Frenchmen, Japanese troops were required to fight Vietnamese who, as in Hanoi, were intent on the politics of a fait accompli .
Apart from taking the Japanese surrender and recovering Allied prisoners of war, General Gracey's third task was to maintain law and order; and in this he was to recognize the sole authority of the French.
Unprepared for the circumstances which he would encounter he was assured by them that the Vietminh would not resist and that Cédile, the French Commissioner in the South, had tight control of his forces.
Neither, unfortunately, was true.
The southern Vietminh, no less than those in the north, were to resist both principle and practice of the French return to power; the French were unprepared for any alternative and Gracey's forces were effectively caught in the middle.
On 17 September 1945, a fortnight after Gracey's arrival, the Vietminh attempted to paralyse Saigon by calling a general strike.
On the 22nd Gracey's forces assisted the French in what, despite what was claimed at the time and subsequently, was an almost bloodless coup by which they occupied the Town Hall and other central points; and two nights after that about a hundred and fifty French civilians, including  many women and children, were massacred by Vietnamese who burst into the Cite Heraud district past indifferent Japanese guards.
Whether it was the Vietminh, the Binh Xuyen, or, most likely, Trotskyists, who were responsible, it obviously shattered any confidence that the restoration of French power could be achieved without such savage resistance.
On the British side there was a string of adverse comments on French performance and attitudes from newspaper correspondents; although the Daily Telegraph correspondent was not being particularly sensational when he reported on the unnecessary brutality of the French and concluded ‘The solution of the problem of rule in Indo-China will depend primarily upon French ability to exercise tact and conciliation’.
Much more remarkable, however, were Gracey's comments when it became obvious that his earlier hopes —‘If only the French would promise progressive sovereignty…say two or three years and the Annamites would be equally ready to meet them…’(an almost exact parallel, so he thought, with Burma)— stood little chance of fulfilment.
General Leclerc's troops had shown great skill and speed, Gracey said, but much unnecessary brutality.
A Divisional Intelligence Summary described the senior French officer as ‘small-minded, lacking in imagination and pig-hesded’ and, more important, said that the Indian other ranks had begun to distrust both the French troops and the civil authorities.
In the preface to another intelligence report, the SEAC Assistant Director of Intelligence addressed himself squarely to some of the political problems which were being faced.
For example, that it was hard to explain to the Vietnamese how large numbers of Vichy French were back in positions held during the war.
Although he was convinced that there was conclusive evidence that Japanese intelligence organizations were behind the Vietminh and their revolt, he also said that throughout their handling of the situation the French appeared to lack every vestige of imagination but, ‘provided the French are prepared to deal with the Annamites as human beings and not as chattels for exploitation as in the past, there is every reason to believe that the leading Annamites will not only listen to them, but will help them…’
When the French and the Vietminh came face to face in the south there was, apparently, no room for compromise and conflict was almost immediate.
On the rare occasions when French and Vietminh met and when local concessions might have helped at least to improve the atmosphere — for example the release of hostages taken by Vietminh — the Vietminh for their part denied all knowledge that any had been taken while violent incidents were either attributed to the forces outwith their control, which may well have been true, or else to the anger of the people which, again, may have been true but did not improve matters.
Behind this, and the Vietminh demands  for the complete restoration of their government and the disarming of French forces there was, as Dunn puts it, the insoluble problem: ‘The Vietminh wanted full sovereignty and the French delegates could not negotiate it.’
Furthermore, ‘Both sides were stuck — neither was empowered to negotiate without instructions’.
In the meantime fighting continued both in and around Saigon and, increasingly, as more and more French troops arrived, throughout Cochinchina.
Gracey's British Indian forces eventually totalled over twenty thousand men; and by December 1945 the French had about the same number in Vietnam.
Much of the fighting, however, involved the Japanese forces who were acting under Gracey's command but there were significant numbers, too, fighting for whatever reasons on the Vietminh side.
Apart from armoured columns the French navy had joined in as well and on at least one occasion the battleship Richelieu was in action against land targets.
Whether it would have been possible against this background of practically continuous fighting in the south, more than a year before the first Vietnam war between France and the Vietminh is usually reckoned to have begun, for either side to have modified its objectives to the point where compromise could have been reached is obviously a question which is relevant to the origins of the Vietnam war and one must therefore look for the characteristics which, at least after the event, suggest a remarkably high risk of collision.
On the French side one may begin in Paris with the emotional response of the Consultative Assembly to the cable which de Gaulle read out on March 20 1945 from one of the French garrisons fighting for their lives in Tonkin.
As the Assembly rose to its feet ‘amid shouts and tears’ few of them would have realized that it was sixty years almost to the day since the Assembly of the Third Republic had responded in much the same way to the Tonkin crisis of 1885.
Then, it had produced the tide of feeling which landed France in Vietnam.
Now, it was responding to what de Gaulle had called the solemn pact which was at the moment being sealed ‘in the suffering of all and the blood of the soldiers’ between France and the peoples of the Indochinese Union and to his belief that ‘not for a single hour did France lose the hope and the will to recover free Indo-China’.
FREEDOM AND THE FRENCH UNION
Of equal importance, perhaps, was the assumption that France would, as a matter of course, recover Indochina and, although it might be described as ‘free’, the status of Indochina or Vietnam or, as it happened, part of Vietnam, would, as the French saw  it, be determined by its membership of the French Union.
This was a concept that was formally introduced in the declaration of the Provisional French Government of 24 March 1945.
And it was to be within that Union that ‘Indo-China will enjoy appropriate liberty’.
A year later the issue of ‘appropriate liberty’ and indeed the nature of the French Union itself was still unresolved but by this time a Preliminary Convention had been signed between the Government of the French Republic and what was described, and recognized, as the Government of Vietnam.
The Republic of Vietnam was accepted as a free state having its own government, parliament, army and finances.
At the same time, it was recognized as ‘forming part of the Indo-Chinese Federation and the French Union’.
As far as either side was concerned, were the two concepts of freedom and membership of the French Union compatible?
And, most important of all, by freedom did one mean independence?
If not, conceptually, was there any prospect of real agreement?
Almost everything about the French mood in 1945 suggests that unqualified independence was just about the last thing that anyone envisaged for any part of the French colonial empire.
The pattern may look more obvious after the event, but it is worth pointing out that the French war in Vietnam in 1946 is sandwiched between their bombardment of Damascus and the eruption at Setif in Algeria in 1945 and their violent repression of the nationalist revolt in Madagascar in 1947 after similar claims had been made for independence within the French Union.
At the same time as they were re-establishing themselves in Vietnam the French were finally being evicted, as they saw it, from Syria and the Lebanon and while these were League of Nations mandates rather than parts of the French Empire proper, their loss was no less bitterly resented.
An attempt was made, at least by de Gaulle, to link riots in Syria in May 1945 with what happened in Algeria on VE Day; but the scale of the French reaction in Algeria to the murder of over a hundred European settlers and associated atrocities left at least a thousand and perhaps as many as six thousand Algerian dead.
Although Algeria would later prove to be the scene of last-ditch French resistance to decolonization, in the mood of the country in 1945 independence for Vietnam was equally inconceivable.
It seemed, as much as anything, to be a matter of principle.
Not only was France a republic, one and indivisible, but so was the French ‘community’ which comprised France and its colonies.
In any event, and no matter what reforms were contemplated, the issue that was posed by Marius Moutet, pre-war Minister for the Colonies in the Popular Front and shortly to become Minister for Overseas France, was whether or not France really considered herself to be a nation of 100 m. and whether or not she was to be a great power.
Others, like Bidault or de Gaulle, had no doubt: but for this even to be approximately  true the contribution of her overseas territories was indispensable.
De Gaulle, at Brazzaville in 1944, may have believed that France, of all the imperial powers, would choose nobly and liberally in a new era; on a more mundane level and on the same occasion it was also agreed that ‘access to the riches of all that bears the French name is the most certain measure of our country's return to grandeur’.
It would seem from the record, therefore, that France was not prepared to dismantle her colonial empire.
That is to say no French government and probably no French political party at this time was willing to concede the principle of secession; and the permanent loss of Indochina would obviously have made it harder to hold on to French North Africa and even to Black Africa.
In Vietnam, however, after the war had ended, half of the problem was how to regain half of the country that was still under Chinese occupation and here one might argue, cynically, that the French Union was indispensable.
And even if it was not it allowed both sides an extra nine months in which to strengthen their positions.
AGREEMENT OR DISAGREEMENT?
The agreement of 6 March 1946 reached between Jean Sainteny and Ho Chi Minh in effect postponed the basic disagreement between France and the Vietminh.
The situation that produced it was comparable to that which was to lead to a similar agreement between the returning Dutch and those who had proclaimed the Republic of Indonesia: in both cases neither side was prepared, there and then, for all-out war when the last British forces left Indonesia or when the Chinese armies in Tonkin were finally persuaded to leave.
In Indonesia a large part of the argument which led on two occasions to undeclared war turned on the federal nature of the new state.
In Vietnam, it was the same argument, and with many of the same features, that underlay the nature of the French Union.
In so far as the French Union was a federation which would group Indochina, Black Africa, and North Africa it was, as Raymond Aron pointed out, a grandiose objective but at least in the original proposals of the drafting committee which included a former governor general of Indochina, Alexandre Varenne, it was to be a union based on free consent.
To that extent it might in principle have been acceptable to the Vietminh government: but probably only to the point where, in practice, it was powerless to circumscribe the sovereignty of the Democratic Republic.
In a memorable analogy the black African nationalist (and socialist) leader Leopold Senghor had said that the French Union must not be built like a cage that no one would care to enter; but in the Ho-Sainteny agreement the Vietminh were in effect being asked to take up the tenancy of a building that had not yet been constructed.
Perhaps with a generous spirit on both sides some sort of accommodation might have been reached but before the possible constraints of the French Union became important there were more ominous developments, first in Vietnam, then in Paris, which would make a full-scale confrontation more likely.
The Ho-Sainteny agreement, momentous in that it allowed a temporary re-occupation of Tonkin by French forces, was nevertheless reckoned to be a preliminary.
When the two sides met again at the hill station of Dalat in April 1946 it was obvious that the immediate disagreement was on the nature of the Indochina Federation and whether or not the Government of Vietnam, which the French had already recognized, was anything more than the Republic of Tonkin.
Both sides had agreed that the unification of the three parts of Vietnam would be subject to a referendum.
It was now becoming increasingly clear that the French were determined at least to hold on to the richest party, namely Cochinchina: or at least this was the unmistakable objective of the new French High Commissioner, the implacable Admiral Thierry d'Argenlieu.
As much if not more Gaulliste than de Gaulle, d'Argenlieu, a regular naval officer, was also the former prior of a Carmelite monastery.
Practically unstoppable in pursuit of his ideas about France's place in Indochina, he was also, apparently uncontrollable, at least by the government in Paris.
Although his actions were widely condemned at the time and subsequently, it is a more open question whether his objectives were so much at odds with those of his government.
When they returned to Cochinchina the French began by treating it as a restored colony and with Cedile, the French Commissioner in the South, and Moutet in Paris both anticipating, or frustrating, the results of the promised referendum there were increasing prospects that it would be retained for French economic interests in the form of a nominally autonomous government.
The creation of such a ‘free state’ of the same order as the one which the French already recognized in Hanoi was bound to reflect on French good faith and again to call the unity of Vietnam into question.
When the negotiations began at Dalat it was Giap who assumed the principal role on the Vietnamese side and while, as communists, they might have accepted a smaller but communist state that could conceivably have been free of the French, it was as nationalists that the Vietminh argued their case for indissoluble national unity.
To lose Cochinchina, they said, would be like France losing Alsace-Lorraine; and with the French stepping up their efforts to create the impression of autonomy in Cochinchina the conference ended in total disagreement.
In Cochinchina, as in Tonkin, French, Vietminh, and nationalist forces were in close proximity and as long as Vietnam's political future was in doubt  clashes were almost inevitable.
The Vietminh argued that the French in Cochinchina had never observed either the spirit or the letter of the Ho-Sainteny agreement.
The French replied that the devastation and terrorism that continued was not all the fault of ‘dissident’ nationalist Vietnamese or bandits and although it might not have the status of an ‘official’armed struggle the results were indistinguishable.
And it was to restore order, as much as anything, that a nominally Vietnamese administration provided at least the façade of an ‘independent’ Vietnamese government.
Admiral d'Argenlieu, who regarded the Ho-Sainteny agreement as the equivalent of Munich, was temperamentally opposed to negotiation and was obviously ready if not anxious to put differences with the Vietminh to the test of battle.
General Leclerc, as a soldier, was not, at least not to begin with, and believed not only that the reconquest of Tonkin, even in part, was impossible but that a negotiated settlement was essential even if it conceded independence.
For the moment, however, there was still an outside chance that when the nationalist and communist members of what was described as a good-will parliamentary mission from Hanoi — and Ho as President — arrived in the more liberal and relaxed atmosphere of Paris an understanding might have been reached.
But by the time the delegation set out for Paris, the French Draft Constitution had already been rejected — and with it the principle of free consent on which the French Union was to be based — and while he was still en route to France Ho learned that a Provisional Government of Cochinchina had been announced.
By the time negotiations finally got under way at Fontainebleau, elections for the new Constituent Assembly in France had resulted in a victory for the Catholic MRP, with the Communists in second place, and heavy losses for the French Socialist party.
Neither d'Argenlieu nor Ho led their respective sides at Fontainebleau but an agreement seemed no more likely between their substitutes: Max André, with his interests in the Banque de l'Indo-Chine, and Pham Van Dong.
One, the friend of the new French Prime Minister, Georges Bidault, had apparently been told that he could not concede the fundamental issue of independence; for the other, who was to succeed Ho on his death, and for the large and varied delegation which came to Paris under the title of the Popular National Front (Lien Viet ) everything, practically, turned on the question of Cochinchina.
In what might conceivably have been the last chance of a diplomatic settlement, with the encouraging or surreal touches of a personally popular Ho walking up the Champs Elysees to lay a wreath on the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier and standing beside Bidault on the Fourteenth of July, these were the fundamental issues.
Perhaps, as Ho said later, all that was needed was for the French to pronounce one word: independence; but on both sides this was the most fraught  and emotional issue.
It was unlikely to be conceded by Bidault and the MRP; Thorez and the Communists were not particularly interested; and the only Socialist member of the French team at Fontainebleau resigned after two hours.
As at Dalat in April, the Fontainebleau conference failed entirely on substantive issues.
Bidault, it has been said, leader of the Resistance in occupied France, may have been unaware how the world outside had changed during the war; but in any event distrusted Ho as a communist as well as a nationalist threat to France's post-war international position.
Pham Van Dong in Paris, as well as Giap in Hanoi, had a comparable distrust of French intentions and, since elections of a kind had been held in January 1946, the Vietminh had been busy consolidating communist power at the centre of a nationalist movement which, in its external aspect, impressed many observers with its moderation.
Internally, it was a different matter where ultra-nationalist rivals and critics of even temporary accommodation with the French, as well as those who were suspected of favouring them, were being liquidated in purges which were probably as bloody as most in Eastern Europe and on some occasions it seems the former were killed as a result of Franco-Vietminh collaboration.
In most other respects, however, joint efforts, such as they were, to keep the peace, let alone to share the responsibilities of government, were coming to an end.
In Tonkin as well as in Cochinchina both sides at best ignored the other as well as the general terms of their March agreement.
Thus, and apparently removing all doubt about French intentions to dismember Vietnam, when d'Argenlieu convened another conference at Dalat on 1 August 1946 to discuss Indochinese problems, there were representatives of Laos, Cambodia, and Cochinchina as well as the dubious entities of ‘Southern Annam’ and the montagnards of the Southern Plateau — but no Vietminh.
This was to provide the occasion on the Vietnamese side for terminating the Fontainebleau exercise.
After their return to Vietnam a Constitution was approved for the Democratic Republic which completely ignored the Indochina Federation and all mention of the French Union — but which affirmed that ‘The territory of Vietnam…is one and indivisible’.
Years later, when Sainteny returned to Hanoi, Le Duan recalled these words, which he attributed to Ho Chi Minh, and which may stand as his memorial inscription: ‘The Vietnamese nation is one and indivisible.’
As much as anything it represents the conviction which took the communist leadership of a proto-state into and through two cataclysmic conflicts with a tenacity and disregard of human life that has characterized religious, revolutionary and patriotic wars.
It was opposed, on the French side, by virtually the same principle which, for all the emotional resurgence of Jacobin principles that may have suffused France at the end of the war, had faded by comparison  with the raw and remorseless nationalism that was waiting to engulf the French from one end of Vietnam to the other.
Given these irreconcilable purposes it is Pham Van Dong and Giap, to take two symbols of Vietnamese intransigence, rather than Ho Chi Minh, who represented the reality of Franco-Vietnamese relations in the four or five months before the all-out war began in December 1946; even though it is tempting to consider how, up to the last minute, conflict might have been averted — or at least postponed.
Although the Fontainebleau conference failed and the Vietnamese delegation went home, Ho stayed on to conclude, on 14 September 1946, what Sainteny has called ‘that pathetic modus vivendi ’ which gave France economic concessions and the promise of maintaining cultural connections in return for her co-operation in securing an armistice in the South.
Again, it left the basic issues of independence and Cochinchina unresolved but perhaps, as Ho had said, it was better than nothing.
For the moment it may have smoothed or at least covered the jagged edges between the two sides.
Although it may have also been one of the last, desperate attempts to keep the road open to a negotiated settlement, Ho was being accused by the French, who compared the diplomatic assurances in Paris with continuing violence in Vietnam, of duplicity; and, ominously, by the intransigents in Hanoi, of treachery.
Perhaps it was just procrastination.
He may have believed, and was encouraged to think, that the Communist party would win the coming election in France and form, or at least be made part of, a new government; and the Russian advice seems to have been to hold on and to wait for ‘democratic France’ and its ‘progressive forces’to support the cause of colonial liberation.
Alternatively, Ho may simply have been waiting for something to turn up, something that would tip the scales one way or the other in the situation that was neither peace nor war.
It was also, one must remember, a situation of continuing revolution which had no more ended in August 1945 than the French revolution had in July 1789.
Although compressed into less than 18 months there are certain similarities between the two revolutions, in their tactics as well as their phases, and although it is not explicit there is a remarkable comparison that may be inferred from Devillers' brilliant essay in which he describes a Vietminh, at the end of 1946, already losing momentum and because of that, driven to imprudent acts:
The Vietminh had subjected the people to an extremely painful strain, practically a permanent mobilization, with its unending meetings, mass demonstrations, and the like, with its requisitions, with its control of thoughts and acts, with its atmosphere of suspicion and its informers, with the arrogance — and often the arbitrariness — of its officials, with its youth corps (the Tu Ve), and with the arrests, the abductions or assassination of its opponents and even of those considered lukewarm or suspect.
If the Vietminh still seemed to be the only movement capable of achieving  the fulfilment of the people's aspiration to national independence and to social justice, it nevertheless ruled with the aid of physical terror and moral constraint.
As under the old régime, the political police, now called Trinh Sat or Cong An, was the main buttress of the régime.
FLASHPOINTS
Whether or not it was ‘in their haste, their unwillingness to temporise, that the Vietminh leaders, with their fathomless vanity, had driven their country straight into conflict with France’— the reproach of Vietnamese intellectuals and non-marxist nationalists — it was a rather academic if not drawing-room argument that the Vietminh could easily have brought about national unanimity and created a national state rather than revolution and the party state.
The Vietminh, like the original French Commune, were embedded in the events of a more or less national revolution, turning it in particular directions but by no means in complete control.
The enragés and the Girondins had their counterparts in Vietnam and in some respects, for example asceticism and a belief in virtue, whether Confucian or revolutionary, one might even compare Ho with Robespierre.
More important one should realize that attempts at accommodation between the two new Republics, French and Vietnamese, were taking place not between two sovereign states but between two political forces in the same country, each in the throes of revolution, each unwilling to concede sovereignty to the other.
As both manoeuvred for position, whether it was cutting down trees and digging up streets in Hanoi or sending ‘unauthorized’ French battalions to various strategic points, the risk — and incidence — of clashes increased and both sides were at least preparing for war.
Before he left Fontainebleau Ho had given instructions to be ready for any eventuality.
A few weeks earlier, on 10 April 1946, a circular from General Valluy, at that time d'Argenlieu's deputy in Saigon, had raised the question of a purely military operation ‘in the scenario of a coup d'état' ; and for both sides there seemed to be obvious advantages in striking first.
The attempt by Frenchmen to seize a Chinese junk carrying what was considered to be a cargo of contraband fuel, and their ensuing capture by Vietminh militia, was an unlikely incident to trigger a war and falls, no doubt, into Aristotle's category of trivial occasions.
The incident, trivial in itself, of 20 November 1946, culminated three days later in a terrible bombardment of Haiphong which was a prelude to pitched battles in Tonkin between the Vietminh forces and the French; and although the usually quoted figure of 6,000 Vietnamese dead in Haiphong may be too high, the ease with which casualties  of this order could be inflicted, with a French cruiser joining in at close range, suggested misleadingly that when French forces were fully engaged it would be such a one-sided contest that the Vietminh would learn the appropriate lesson.
Such, indeed, seems on the French side, to have been the object of the exercise.
When d'Argenlieu dispatched himself hastily to Paris a few days after the French elections and before the Haiphong incident, it was to lobby intensively for a policy of firmness; and his tactic, says Devillers, was simple: to create fear.
Not only was this the only way, according to d'Argenlieu, to stop a Vietminh that was determined to oust the French but, in effect, it would be the only way to hold the French Union together.
When the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Indochina met on 23 November 1946 and heard d'Argenlieu's report it resulted in what Devillers affirms was obviously the government's decision to face up to every infringement of the Franco — Vietminh agreement, if necessary by force.
And these infringements, needless to say, could only come from the Vietminh.
Whether or not Bidault actually insisted ‘Il faut tirer le canon’, d'Argenlieu cabled his commander in Saigon, General Valluy, to this effect and, by-passing General Morlière in Hanoi, orders were sent direct to the ‘irascible’ Colonel Dèbes in Haiphong.
Thus, after two days in which a negotiated settlement to the original squabble seemed possible, an ultimatum to the Vietminh to clear out of Haiphong in two hours led to a bombardment which must have killed at least 1,000 people, many if not most of whom would be described as innocent civilians.
As a result, the Vietminh undoubtedly came, as General Valluy intended, to a better appreciation of the situation.
There were fragments of evidence, however, to suggest that the final collision might have been avoided.
In the last interview he gave to a French journalist before the war began, Ho, in envisaging the way in which ‘at all costs war must be averted’, seemed to accept independence within the French Union; although unless this was based on a total misunderstanding of the nature of the French Union, which also seems unlikely, this was probably more of a smoke-screen than a smoke-signal.
On the French side although the Communists failed to form a government and were thus not in a position to change French policy towards Vietnam — whether they would have wanted to do so is not quite so clear — the impasse between them and the MRP had resulted in a caretaker government under the veteran Socialist party leader, Leon Blum; and Blum, calling for an end to equivocation and an absolutely clear definition of policy, had urged not only confidence and friendship but ‘sincere agreement’ on the basis of Vietnamese independence.
Ho responded immediately to this newspaper article by proposing various measures which might lead to a return to normality and to the hopeful provisions of the modus vivendi , not least an end to the press and radio incitements  from both sides, but whether at this stage Ho and Blum were in the saddle or not, things were beginning to fall apart.
For one thing it seems that Ho's reply, via Saigon, was held up deliberately by the French authorities so that it was not received in Paris until after the war had begun.
For another, the ‘war party’ may already have taken over within the Vietminh: at least when Sainteny, attempting his last act of mediation, saw Ho for the last time before the war started, he complained about the moderate elements who had been eliminated from the government to the benefit of the notorious Francophobes; and as the war was on the point of beginning, and as attacks on French soldiers and civilians had not ceased, nor had French retaliation, Sainteny's exasperation was to be seen in his demand that culprits should be punished within 24 hours.
This was hardly a crucial ultimatum but, coming from a moderate, indeed sympathetic Frenchman, it suggests that the French, generally, were beyond the point of no return; while for the Vietminh, with assorted military forces estimated at 60,000, having already lost Haiphong as the point of entry for many of their weapons and in danger now of facing overwhelming French fire power in Hanoi, the temptations of a pre-emptive strike, even if it was an act of desperation, must have been irresistible.
With d'Argenlieu returned to Saigon but no more amenable to close control from Paris than Paris seemed disposed to provide it, with the French forces understandably nervous and anxious at least to clear Hanoi of their opponents, one may feel that whether it was the French or the Vietminh who brought about the final rupture does not much matter.
In the event, and after at least a hint of treachery, shortly after eight o'clock on the night of 19 December 1946 the Vietminh blew up the power station in Hanoi and signalled the formal beginning of the Vietnam war.
ACHESON AND THE ENTANGLING ALLIANCE: 1946–1952
THE INCLINATION TO INTERVENE: HOPE OF A NEGOTIATED SETTLEMENT
As soon as the French war in Vietnam started the US began to think about forms of intervention.
At first the ideas appeared as rumours and reports: that, although it had not yet been announced, the US had already taken steps to halt the fighting; that, in Washington, ambassador Bonnet had been called in and told that a settlement was imperative; that if the matter was brought up in the UN the US would not necessarily support France; that the US wished to ensure that no Lend-Lease weapons were being used ‘to suppress Vietnam — although it was suspected they were; and that the head of Southeast Asian Affairs at the State Department (Mr A.L.
Moffat) was already in the area and would be glad to assist both sides.
According to the US consul in Saigon, three and a half of these four statements were completely false but, in fact, not only may Under-Secretary of State Dean Acheson have offered the ‘good offices’ of the US (as they were to be offered in Indonesia) but there was also at the same time in effect a plea from Moffat, then in Singapore, that for various reasons the US should intervene.
Third-party action, he said, was essential.
There was a deep need for US moral leadership.
The Vietminh record was no worse than that of the French.
America's ‘hands off’ policy was based on European rather than on Asian considerations.
The USSR was not directly active in Southeast Asia: there was, said Moffat sarcastically, no need because the democracies were performing most effectively on their behalf.
And Moffat himself seemed hopeful of a political solution based on an independent Vietnam which was to be associated with or even part of the French Union.
At about the same time as the State Department was receiving this cable from their most senior man on the spot, Secretary of State Byrnes was cabling the Paris embassy that the French were planning to reconquer Tonkin and might set  up a puppet government; while in Hanoi the French commander, General Morlière, was claiming that the US and Chinese consuls had denounced the ‘criminal and bestial folly’ of the Vietminh; although apparently they hadn't said a word one way or the other.
Thus, by the very beginning of 1947, and well before ‘containment’, the Marshall plan and the Zhdanov doctrine drew the battle lines between Russia and the US in Europe and in general it may be seen that a framework of impressions, intentions, hopes and misunderstandings was being thrown up which would support US policy towards Vietnam for the next 20 years and under whose weight it would ultimately collapse.
Specifically, there was the idea of intervention; historic doubts about and antipathy towards European colonialism; corresponding commitment to self-determination and, above all, an impressive self-confidence founded on US power, a resurgence of Wilsonian ideals, and a belief that the principles of the Atlantic Charter and those of the UN should at least inform if they did not determine the foreign policies of the US.
At any rate at the beginning, there was a certain even-handedness towards France and the Vietminh coupled with resistance to France's manifest intention that the US could hardly help being involved, one way or another, even though they professed neutrality.
This role may have been rather a disappointment to both sides, as General Gallagher said when he got back from Hanoi, although by opposing the clearance of wartime US mines that had been laid in Haiphong harbour, thus preventing an early return of French troopships, Gallagher seems to have come down rather heavily on the Vietminh side.
Once the war between France and the Vietminh had begun, the time had obviously passed when American operational decisions such as this would affect the fortunes of either side.
For someone like Moffat, one of the professionals who was helping to mould US policy in Southeast Asia, there had been no doubt, at least before the event, that the liberation of Indo-China was going to depend upon the US defeat of Japan.
Because the US was sacrificing blood and treasure to assure peace and stability in the Far East, the maintenance of which after the war would be largely a US responsibility, it would not have been unreasonable ‘to insist that the French give adequate assurances as to the implementing of policies in Indo-China which we consider essential to assure peace and stability in the Far East’.
Perhaps, as Moffat said, Americans could see the situation in Southeast Asia more objectively than the British, the French and the Dutch because ‘they could analyse problems without the handicap of self-interest, prejudice, pride or domestic politics’.
When it came to actually making policy, however, and actually using ‘the power we had to try to secure self-government in Indo-China’, not only would the problems of intervention against US allies presumably have been more difficult than against her enemies, but there was always the risk  as well that circumstances might prejudice ideal or even optimum solutions.
For example, when the State Department's Far Eastern Office was trying, unsuccessfully, to put together a compromise paper that would be agreed with the European Office, one may applaud the objective of an Indo-China that was to be fully self-governed, autonomous, and democratic: but there was a world of difference between a ‘national’ and a ‘federal’government which would become obvious as events unfolded and the qualification, which Moffat and his colleagues seemed to accept, to full self-government which was explicit in Indo-China's recommended partnership in the French Union, and was, by implication reserved to France as a matter of imperial concern, precisely the point, or at least the formality, which produced the irreparable break between France and Ho's infant Republic.
Moffat's testimony although, obviously, personal would seem to uncover therefore not only the roots of US policy in Vietnam — a belief in trusteeship, and international organization generally, a distrust of France, a traditional antipathy to colonialism — but also an immanent if unconscious belief in US intervention that was necessary for the ordering of a more perfect world.
At the same time he reflects the important belief that Ho Chi Minh was first and foremost a Vietnamese nationalist even though in his next sentence Moffat said ‘He was also a communist and believed that communism offered the best hope for the Vietnamese people.’
This may, of course, have been a retrospective opinion that was at least tinged with 25 years' subsequent experience and challenged, both before and after, the worldwide definitions of the late 1940s which seemed to require that the Vietminh should have been put into either one of two boxes, nationalist or communist, but not both.
At the time, however, the question of Ho Chi Minh's communism and his connections with Moscow and with ‘international communism, seemed somewhat academic and certainly no more important to begin with than the mounting suspicions of France's unreconstructed colonialism.
When Secretary of State Marshall was cabling the Embassy in Paris that Ho Chi Minh had direct Communist connections — whether or not this was a fact depends upon what one means by ‘connection’— he argued that it was also a fact that colonial empires, in the l9th-century sense, were rapidly becoming a thing of the past.
Although the US, or at least the State Department, ‘frankly [had]no solution of problem to suggest’ it was obvious that the US was at this stage hoping for a negotiated settlement, a settlement in which their further hope was that France would find it possible to be more than generous.
By this time it was becoming obvious that in spite of the fact that the French were conveying the impression of a limited operation  ‘to restore order’(which might be at least six months to a year) they were hoping for more moderate Vietnamese leaders to emerge and, in the meantime, they would not after all negotiate with Ho Chi Minh.
Thus, although the US had been told by the French not only that there was no question of the ‘reconquest’ of Indo-China but that it was also doubtful that France had the military strength to accomplish it, they were also invited to believe, by the French, that Ho was in direct contact with Moscow and was receiving advice and instructions from the Soviets.
Acheson, as acting Secretary of State, may not have gone so far; although just before the war began, when it looked as if Moffat was going to meet Ho in Hanoi, Acheson asked him to ‘keep in mind Ho's clear record as agent international communism, absence evidence recantation Moscow affiliations…and support Ho receiving [from]French Communist Party.’
(Incidentally, during the Fontainebleau conference Ho had called on the US Ambassador in Paris to assure him that he and his party aspired to independence in the French Union and that he was not a communist.)
Again, neither these comments nor what was described as the least desirable eventuality ‘the establishment of a Communist-dominated, Moscow-oriented state in Indo-China’, seem inaccurate or unreasonable: although it may be argued that the inherent fault was to assume that this represented the limit of Ho's power and appeal.
In any case the State Department was uncertain about the nature of the Vietminh's communist connections —‘possibly in indirect touch with Moscow and direct touch with Yenan’— and French influence was reckoned to be important not only as an antidote to Soviet influence but also to protect Vietnam and Southeast Asia from ‘future Chinese imperialism’.
THE FRENCH CONNECTION
Such hopes as there may have been — American, French, even Vietminh — of a cease-fire or negotiated settlement lingered on for several months but once the French had begun fighting they presented their case, modestly, that military operations were designed with no thought of reconquest but simply to persuade the Vietminh that they had no hope of victory.
After all, of course, negotiations would be possible and already the French claimed that with an estimated eight to ten thousand dead, Vietminh resistance was weakening.
In diplomatic exchanges, at least, the French accepted American reservations about unregenerate colonialism in Vietnam although, as the French pointed out, they could not be expected to assist in or condone the establishment of a government of Vietnam which would not follow democratic principles ‘as these are understood in  the West’.
As they did not regard the existing ‘Democratic Republic’ as representative of the people of Annam and Tonkin (the question of Cochinchina tended not to be raised) this obviously ruled out serious  negotiation .
At least, one may take this assumption from the terms which the French emissary Paul Mus, after an arduous journey, presented to Ho in May 1947 and which required what amounted to a conditional surrender; and in any case now that the Communist Party had been ousted from the French government there was no longer the same effective demand in France for a negotiated settlement.
Nevertheless, with repeated French insinuations that they had neither the means nor the intention of reconquering Vietnam, it obviously came as a shock to the US to discover that this was exactly what France seemed to have in mind.
As it happened, in spite of General Marshall's fears, France's colonial policy did not become a Congressional issue in 1947 nor did it, contrary to what Marshall feared, have much effect on public opinion in the US.
In any event, in so far as Congress was interested in Asia, and had assumed many direct responsibilities, its concern was with military assistance and 99-year leases on bases in the Philippines and the dilemmas of policy that these signalled towards China.
Although the US may never have been on the brink of intervention in China she had sent 50,000 marines to Northern China in 1945, followed by General Marshall acting as Truman's personal representative.
His mission, in so far as it was to reconcile the Nationalists and Communists, was a failure and indeed could hardly have been expected to be otherwise.
Events in Vietnam, in many ways comparable although obviously complicated by the factor of French colonialism, were of infinitely less interest and for the moment seemed to require only a definition of attitudes rather than acts of policy.
Nevertheless, Vietnam, as well as China, represented entanglements for US policy although, in one respect at least, the possibility that the US might be able to influence French policy and be able to exert sufficient influence on France to reach a negotiated settlement made the situation more hopeful.
It was, moreover, a hope which the French encouraged from time to time although what was achieved seemed always to be less than what was promised.
Perhaps Bidault, on a visit to the US, gave the best idea of French intentions when he said that Marshall Aid would make it possible for France ‘to avoid the abandonment of French positions’ and even where there were the generous intentions that the US had hoped for, one way or another they always seemed to be frustrated.
Thus, Bollaert, who had replaced d'Argenlieu as High Commissioner, apparently wanted France to take the initiative and to pronounce the word ‘independence’ in a major speech on 15 August 1947, the day on which India was to receive independence.
Even though it seems only to have been conditional  independence the terms were so alarming to General Valluy that he flew back to Paris to warn the French Government and the outcome was a special cabinet meeting at which hardly anyone supported the Bollaert initiative.
The result was that when Bollaert finally made his speech on 10 September it was obvious that, for all the rhetoric and for all the idealization of the French Union, if it was independence that France was offering, it was so heavily circumscribed as to make it obvious that France had, at most, transferred the Jacobin concept of ‘the nation one and indivisible’ to a French Union in which she would still be in a commanding position.
Whether or not one regards this as a prime example of the way in which a political settlement was undercut by the optimism of those Frenchmen who believed in a military solution it should also be pointed out, as Irving does, that ‘Any policy which might have been construed as the abandonment of Indo-China would have been rejected by the National Assembly in 1947, if not by an overwhelming majority, then at least by a decisive one’ but this, in turn, did nothing to resolve the US dilemma.
As it was formulated by the US Consul at Saigon:
Morally, end French believed have in view and tactics to achieve such end are to be condemned and US cannot be party to return pre-war status or even give such appearance without risking destroying large amount confidence natives still have in US.
Practically, however, it is of paramount importance that Indo-China does not become prey to an imposed totalitarian régime by use recognized weapons of repression, reprisal and terrorism — natives are divided and majority unprepared for democratic freedom and in such division and unpreparedness the single-minded purpose of 80 to 100 real Communists could easily gain upper hand.
No brief can be held for any solution that would put France and Western democracy influence out of Indo-China or leave natives believe US indifferent.
Given these premises, then, and Moffat's distaste notwithstanding that it would imply ‘democracies reduced resort monarchy as weapon against Communism’, one wonders what else, apart from outright rejection, the US might have done when the French turned towards ex-Emperor Bao Dai: at least as a rallying point for non-communist Vietnamese nationalists and, of course, as someone who might be expected to be more amenable to French influence than Ho Chi Minh.
Nevertheless there was a chance, perhaps, that a French government might have been so far-sighted or faint-hearted that it would have ordered a cease-fire, entered into serious negotiations, abandoned its insistence on membership of the French Union, accepted, at least by instalments, an independent, more or less communist state in a presumably close relationship with either the USSR or the Chinese Communist Party, or both, and been prepared to rely on Vietminh  goodwill, such as it might be, for the preservation of whatever position they chose to accord France.
It is just conceivable that something like this might have happened had there been a Communist government in France.
It is inconceivable that it would have happened under any other party or coalition in the time that remained before the French decided on a military solution.
It is also problematic what line the US would have taken if France had decided on such a negotiated settlement.
On the one hand an opinion within the Southeast Asian Division of the State Department that ‘the ardent leadership of the small Communist group will become less vital’ and would be followed by the natural development of political parties.
On the other the robust scepticism of the Western European Division:
It may not be certain, as Ken Landon says, that Ho and Co will succeed in setting up a Communist State if they get rid of the French, but let me suggest that from the stand-point of the security of the US, it is one hell of a big chance to take.
In the event the acceptance of an alternative Vietnamese state under Bao Dai was, from the beginning, recognized as almost as big a risk.
Although the US was anxious (or at least willing) to approve the Bay of Along agreement which would have reincorporated Cochinchina with the other two parts of Vietnam and paved the way for the return of Bao Dai as the Emperor of a legally united Vietnam, the French government was hesitating to submit the agreement to the Assembly because Indo-China, as the US Ambassador in France described it, was a stick of dynamite or, to change the metaphor, the French government was like an overloaded ship incapable of accommodating one more passenger without capsizing: ‘Indo-China is that passenger’.
On 27 September 1948, the State Department's policy statement was in fact a re-statement of the US dilemma.
In one sentence it was ‘The objectives of US policy can only be attained by such French action that will satisfy the nationalist aspirations of the peoples of Indo-China’.
French sovereignty, it was suggested, had been recognized over Indo-China; but the paper maintained that this did not imply any commitment on the part of the US to assist France to exert its authority over the Indo-Chinese people.
‘Since VJ day, the majority people of the area, the Vietnamese, have stubbornly resisted the re-establishment of French authority, a struggle in which we have tried to maintain so far as possible the position of non-support of either party’.
Thus, the US had declined to permit the export to the French in Indo-China of arms and munitions for the prosecution of the war against the Vietnamese.
(Although, as the free export of arms to France had been permitted, the restrictions were more nominal than real.)
Since early in 1947 the French have employed about 115,000 troops in Indo-China, with little result, since the countryside except in Laos and Cambodia remains under the firm control of the Ho Chi Minh government.
A series of French-established puppet governments has tended to enhance the prestige of Ho's government and to call in to question, on the part of the Vietnamese, the sincerity of French intentions to accord an independent status to Vietnam.
As the statement concluded, the objectives of US policy towards Indo-China had not been realized.
Three years after the termination of war in 1945 a friendly nation, France, was fighting a desperate and apparently losing struggle in Indo-China.
The solution by French military reconquest of Indo-China was not desirable.
Neither, however, was complete withdrawal of the French from Indo-China for, as it was assumed that in all likelihood Indo-China would be taken over by the militant communist group, at best there might follow a transition period marked by chaos and terrorist activities, which would then create a political vacuum into which the Chinese inevitably would be drawn or pushed.
It is interesting that, apart from generic communism, it was the power of China that was here identified as the principal threat to Indo-China.
A couple of weeks later, on October 13 1948, the State Department's secret circular instruction ‘Pattern of Soviet Policy in Far-East and South-East Asia’ afforded a general conspectus which, apart from assuming boundless and malevolent Soviet intentions, also inferred a single goal ‘to ensure Soviet control being as surely installed and predominate as in the satellite countries behind the Iron Curtain’.
If this was the overall assumption then, given that the communists were reckoned to have captured the nationalist movement in Vietnam, there could, logically, be no other course open to the US — France, naturally, would have her own reasons — than to resist.
Later on, and particularly in 1950, one might wonder whether the particulars of US policy towards Vietnam had been swamped in the generalities of across-the-board resistance to communism; but even before some critics have discerned a militarization and globalization of US policy, and before the emotional climate of the US changed, one may see, as a piece of sober analysis, the beginning of a policy based on certain not altogether unfounded assumptions about communism, China, and the objectives of the Soviet Union.
Implementation of that policy, in Indo-China however, would depend upon France; and after two years of war and in spite of some growing and ineffable optimism, the French were still looking for a purposeful Vietnam policy and had revealed not so much procrastination and missed opportunities as a sort of political paralysis.
Nevertheless, and at least from the time the North Atlantic Pact was signed in April 1949, France had a certain entitlement as an ally.
For Acheson, who became Secretary of State in January 1949, as for most of the Administration, Congress and probably most of  the American people, and as a straight and simple choice, France was more important than Vietnam or Indo-China and more valuable than a party aspiring to be government which, in spite of impeccable anti-colonial credentials and its ability to present itself as all things to all men, was beginning to look more and more like an affiliated communist state.
Already, then, it might be seen that the French were digging the pit into which the US would eventually fall.
Already, too, one may see the start of a symbiotic relationship in which France would increasingly depend upon American resources to achieve purposes which, left to herself, would be beyond her, while American objectives, although they did not entirely coincide with the French and for all the power which they would ultimately deploy, had to include France as a frail but, for the moment, indispensable means by which they might be attained.
From time to time however there were vivid flashes of US policy-making which suggested that Indo-China was regarded as a means to an end, rather than an end in itself; and those of a philosophical disposition may see this as the flaw which turned idealism into tragedy.
In his study of Dean Acheson, Professor Gaddis Smith devotes a chapter to ‘The Reversal of Policy toward Indo-China’ a reversal over which he says, Acheson presided, which he encouraged, and in part, initiated.
In Gaddis Smith's account this is something which happened in 1950 and there was, as will be seen, a cluster of commitments round about April and May of that year from which it would be difficult to turn back; although another of Acheson's biographers has argued that, contrary to what revisionist historians say, Acheson's Indo-China policy did not make future American military involvement inevitable.
Acheson's ideas on Indo-China and South-East Asia, says Gaddis Smith, were vague and sometimes shifted depending on the person to whom he was talking.
Even as Acheson pondered the problem Smith argues that the US was already moving toward support of the French although it might not have been so much a matter of whose hand was on the tiller as how the compass was being set.
DIVISION IN THE STATE DEPARTMENT?
Within the State Department it has been argued that two competing strategies — one ‘Asian-oriented’ and the other ‘Europe-oriented’— had emerged and that the critical question was whether the US should have insisted on French concessions to Vietnamese nationalism as a condition of US support.
Alternatively, it may be  suggested that the question was how much the French should have been asked to concede; and even if the critical time,(according to Edmund Gullion,) was ‘right after the Elysee agreements of March 1949’ and for all the complaint that ‘South-East Asia's policy has been junked’, and dismay at Acheson's ‘French captivity, a closer inspection suggests that there may not in fact have been all that much difference in the assumptions upon which different parts of the State Department were operating.
The reference to a French captivity was the occasion when Walton Butterworth, the Department's Director of Far Eastern Affairs, had, in Acheson's absence, attempted something in the nature of a diplomatic coup.
Under the imprimatur of the Acting Secretary of State, Butterworth had sent the Embassy in Paris what purported to be the Department's views on the Elysee agreement with the request that the memorandum should be presented to the French government.
In brief, it was a recommendation that France should recognize the equality and acknowledge the sovereignty of Vietnam and that Vietnam's participation in the French Union should, at most , be voluntary.
As it happened Acheson was in Paris when the cable arrived; the Embassy replied with the unanimous opinion that it would be a serious mistake to deliver the memorandum; and Acheson, having seen the correspondence, agreed that it would be inappropriate at the time.
The ‘Far Eastern’ memorandum was a superb and elegant paper even though, in its abstract idealizations of how colonialism should have come to an end, it sounded rather like a secular Sermon on the Mount.
Nevertheless one should ask, even on the basis of this lecture, whether there really was a dichotomy between Western Europe and the Far East divisions in the State Department.
Certainly Ambassador Bruce's reporting from Paris appears to have been impartial; while the Far Eastern memorandum took for granted first that those in command of the so-called Vietnamese Democratic Republic were men trained in the methods and doctrines of international communism; secondly, that should they succeed, a pattern of foreign totalitarianism would be clamped upon Vietnam under which all liberties, national and personal, would be lost and thirdly, that the paramount question in Indo-China was whether the country was to be saved from communist control: all other issues were irrelevant.
It was, in fact, because of Vietnam's importance that the French should be compelled to concede independence.
In any event the ‘Far East’ solution depended, with rather specious simplicity, on the ability to separate communist sheep from nationalist goats and even though the distinction was recognized as the sine qua non of a solution, it assumed that those who would not support genuine independence, once it was granted by the French, would identify themselves as communists: and would thereby distinguish themselves from the rest of the ‘nationalist elements’who comprised the major part of the resistance forces.
An  even more extraordinary paper originated in the State Department: described as a ‘possible method of solving the Indo-China problem’ which would ‘once and for all smoke out Ho Chi Minh and determine whether he is primarily a nationalist or a communist’.
Assuming that a common position could be reached between the US, France, Britain, India and the Philippines, either one of the last two countries would convene a conference; France would be induced to grant Vietnam full independence; and an international commission would be established that was to remain in place for several years.
Ho, as well as Bao Dai, was to be consulted and it would be put to him that if he was the real nationalist which he professed to be he would ‘accept loyally the decisions and mandates of the government and the subsequent constituent assembly, etc. and bind himself unequivocally not to…subvert the true nationalism of his people or a government that might emerge from the multilateral effort’.
It could even be suggested to him that he leave Vietnam and ‘take up once more the philosophical studies to which he had devoted a great deal of his previous life’, and it might also be suggested that ‘there would be pension adequate to support him in those studies’.
Apart from understandable concern with the French side of the triangular relationship with Vietnam, US policy makers were under two further constraints had they wished to take a more free-wheeling course.
Both of them were self-imposed.
In 1972, when he chaired the Hearings before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee which were given the imposing title ‘Causes, Origins, and Lessons of the Vietnam War’, a rather dyspeptic Senator Fulbright sought to put much of the blame for American involvement on Dean Acheson, on his European orientations and on his close war-time connections with the British.
As Fulbright presented it, in what amounted to a proclamation of American innocence and British guilt, the US had been had' by her allies; and while this may not appear to be entirely convincing, Fulbright had picked up the importance of what Acheson had described as the danger of Ho Chi Minh's ‘direct communist connection’— and might, indeed, have gone further.
The issue was not whether Ho was a communist but whether there was, in principle, any possibility of voluntary, autonomous communism.
By a sort of transposed assumption based on post-war experience Acheson had told the National War College in December 1947 that for Greeks, Italians and others it had not been a free choice whether they accepted or rejected communism: because they were being coerced either by an internal organization financed by other countries or by external pressure to adopt a system of government which had the inescapable consequence of inclusion in the system of Russian power.
And this, in turn, would seem to justify Professor Gaddis's conclusion that the assumption was that such governments, whether in Western Europe or Japan, and whether or not they came to power by legal or illegal  means, could only be regarded as instruments of the Kremlin and hence not truly independent.
A priori then, it would seem that Ho Chi Minh and his government were only to be regarded as an extension of Soviet power; an assumption that was to be reinforced by the second constraint which originated in the Department of State.
It was that Southeast Asia was ‘the target of a co-ordinated offensive plainly directed by the Kremlin’.
This was the conclusion of the Policy Planning Staff which, when it began work in February 1949, certainly had enough circumstantial evidence to prompt such a conclusion.
In March 1948 a communist insurrection had broken out in Burma.
In Malaya, the government and the communist party stumbled into action against each other in June.
In the Philippines, Taruc resumed his struggle against the government and announced that he was a communist while in Indonesia, whatever triggered it off, communists at Madiun in September 1948 attempted to stage a revolution within the revolution.
Added to this there was the alarming, although on closer inspection ambiguous, evidence of concerted communist plans for Asia as a whole that were discussed at the World Federation of Democratic Youth Conference in Calcutta in February 1948.
In the end, however, and in spite of Acheson's approval the policy Planning Staff paper (PPS 51) remained, as Robert Blum puts it, a non-policy paper: for information rather than for action.
But it was sent to the National Security Council and in the meantime Secretary of Defense Johnson, according to the internal ‘History of the Indo-China Incident’ prepared for and by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, had called upon the NSC to determine exactly how US security was threatened by the current situation in the Far East and to formulate tentative courses of action which were to be co-ordinated for the whole region and were to outline specific objectives to be attained.
Thus, the NSC had before it the State Department's political assessment that the area was, to repeat, ‘the target of a co-ordinated offensive plainly directed by the Kremlin'.
And the following month, July 1949, Acheson apparently issued instructions that it was a ‘fundamental decision of American policy that the United States does not intend to permit any further communist domination on the continent of Asia or in South-east Asia’.
A COMMUNIST OFFENSIVE IN SOUTH-EAST ASIA?
One could argue, then, that by July 1949 the battle lines had been drawn in Southeast Asia, and even that they had been drawn  unilaterally, by the US.
A threat was perceived: a co-ordinated, Kremlin-directed offensive.
And the Secretary of State had declared what might otherwise be regarded as a powerful if not irresistible force would be met by the immovable object of US resolution.
The Policy Planning Staff opinion on Kremlin-directed strategy went word for word into the NSC report The position of the United States with respect to Asia (NSC 48/1) whose conclusions were approved by the US President on 30 December 1949 (NSC 48/2), although in the NSC paper it was an expression that was qualified by the proposition that it was the colonial — nationalist conflict which had provided a fertile field for subversive communist activities.
By the end of February 1950 the ‘threat of communist aggression against Indo-China’ had become ‘only one phase of anticipated communist plans to seize all of South-East Asia’and a week later the Department of Defense was told by Assistant Secretary of State Dean Rusk that Southeast Asia was in grave danger of communist domination: now identified ‘as a consequence of aggression from communist China’as well as‘internal subversive activities’.
With Senator McCarthy's campaign against treason in the State Department having just got under way this may hardly have been the best time for dispassionate analysis although, if it is not too academic a point, one cannot help comparing these propositions with an earlier assessment (13 October 1948).
This set out a pattern of Soviet policy in Far East and South East Asia in terms of a Soviet policy which sought to weaken the ties between the colonies and the colonial powers through the encouragement of nationalism and by capitalizing on the discontent caused by long periods of ‘colonial oppression’ and by disrupting the colonial economies either by armed action or by labour disorders so that the metropolitan powers would be deprived of revenue and resources.
Thus the USSR would be able to fish profitably in the troubled waters of economic chaos.
At the time when this paper on basic factors in Soviet Far Eastern policy was being composed, the late summer of 1948, the major points of difference within the State Department were whether or not the Russians would actively support the Chinese communists in the civil war if there was a danger that they might deviate along the path recently chosen by Yugoslavia and whether, for the same reason, the Soviets might be reluctant to foster the expansion of Chinese communist influence in Southeast Asia.
A year later, autumn 1949, the communist victory in the Chinese civil war was no longer in doubt and even though other factors, not least intellectual preconceptions, should be taken into account, one must accept Robert Blum's general proposition that ‘The American containment policy in South-East Asia arose from the ashes of its failed policy in China’.
THE CHINESE CONNECTION
If it is obvious that US policy towards Indo-China could not be considered in isolation from its policy towards the rest of Asia, it is even more obvious that the integration of US policy for Vietnam came about at the same time as the disintegration of its policy towards China: the most traumatic episode in US power-war policies in Asia, at least until the outbreak of the Korean war.
China, or at least the Nationalist government, like a great ship going down, had taken many hopes and illusions with it.
One of Acheson's biographers has argued that Americans, having never understood the realities of the Chinese situation, were wholly unprepared for the deluge of hate and vituperation which descended on them from Peking once the Chinese People's Republic had been established.
As an extension of Acheson's ideas about communism it was likewise impossible for Americans to think of the Chinese embracing communism of their own volition and rejecting the US in such a humiliating fashion.
Some of the last-gasp attempts to save the Nationalist governments that were considered in Washington — with the wilder arpeggios such as encouraging the fragmentation of China or even, apparently, a series of punitive air strikes against the Chinese communists (not to mention the sheer fantasy of creating ten new Chinese armies in six months)— originated in the Far Eastern division of the State Department, and in fact the Administration, says Blum, had come close to re-intervention in the Chinese civil war on the mainland, but backed away at the last minute when it discovered that there was no viable force left to support.
It is, therefore, with a sense of mounting horror that one listens to Acheson sounding the knell of US policy in China in the letter which accompanied what is usually known as the China White paper, oblivious to the possibility that the bell was tolling for the same policy that was being reborn in Vietnam.
Not of course that the comparisons seemed in any way apposite at the time.
For example, ‘Its leaders had proved incapable of meeting the crisis confronting them, its troops had lost the will to fight, and its Government had lost popular support’.
And the conclusions: ‘a realistic appraisal of conditions…leads to the conclusion that the only alternative open to the US was full-scale intervention on behalf of a Government which had lost the confidence of its own troops and its own people.
Intervention of such a scope and magnitude would have been resented by the mass of the…people, would have diametrically reversed our historic policy, and would have been condemned by the American people.
The unfortunate but inescapable fact is that the ominous result of the civil war…was beyond the control of the Government of the United States.’
In each of these examples Acheson was, of course, referring to China but so much of what he said here (or to which he gave his name) now seems to be an epitaph for the experiences of Vietnam.
But at the time, as one American policy was ending and another beginning, Vietnam seemed to be exempt from similar considerations.
Looking at it a different way, having decided not to attempt to save China by its efforts, there was only a faint hope that the US could save Vietnam by its example — as a successful democracy.
It was being drawn in to Vietnam by the necessity of responding to developments there, in France, and in China, as well as on account of its own perceptions and its formulation of a general policy of containment.
So, as the internal JCS (Joint Chiefs of Staff) history suggests, the decision to help France combat the Vietminh may have been the logical outgrowth of a reassessment of US interests in Asia as a whole; and yet the particular origins of the US aid programme suggest something less systematic.
Like much policy making, it was rooted in domestic considerations.
President Truman's Democratic Administration existed side by side with a Congress in which there was a Republican majority.
A bi-partisan approach to foreign policy could be maintained in the most momentous ever commitment in US foreign policy, the North Atlantic Pact, but it had broken down on the issue of China even if‘the attack of the primitives’, as Acheson put it, had as much to do with Truman's unexpected victory in the presidential election in 1948 and the consequent fury and frustration of the Republican Party.
When, therefore, on 9 December 1949, an amendment to the Military Aid Program bill proposed by the combined Senate Committees on Foreign Relations and Armed Services sought to earmark the sum of $75 m. for what was eventually described as the ‘general area of China’, in voting to cut the appropriation for the Military Assistance Program in half the House of Representatives may, as Acheson said, have been in one of its berserk moods; but in order to save the Program, and its underpinning of the fledgling North Atlantic Alliance, Acheson was prepared to accept the amendment and, as he presents it, it seems to have been one of the easiest passages in that summer of difficult decisions.
Symbolically, at least, a formal connection had been made in which the success of US policy in strengthening Western Europe had been linked to what was in effect Congressional interest in policies which would ‘contain' communism in Asia.
There was also the effect that the existence of this $75 m. fund, to be spent at the discretion of the President, would have not only on departments of the US administration but on foreign governments as well.
In January 1949 the French had suggested that the US might consider extending Marshall Plan assistance to Vietnam: the rapid economic rehabilitation of Vietnam, they said, could be the key to Bao Dai's success.
A year later (in his celebrated address to the National  Press Club) Acheson raised the question whether American military assistance to Southeast Asia might provide ‘the missing component in a problem which might otherwise be unsolved’.
Now, with the approximate end of the Dutch-Indonesian conflict, the foremost of US political and strategic concerns in Southeast Asia, and given the conceptual underpinnings of US policy and the operational commitment to the success of the Bao Dai experiment, Vietnam was the obvious place to begin.
In its internal history for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, their secretariat give them the credit (or blame) for taking the first step in shifting the battle for Asia from China to Southeast Asia.
This, they suggest, was done on 17 December 1949 when the JCS proposed that the $75 m. fund should include French Indo-China, as well as Burma and Thailand, and this provided the means for an early programme of assistance in the French struggle against Ho Chi Minh.
In point of fact the JCS had been pressing for consistent applications of containment ever since 1947, had identified US security interests with Nationalist success in China and had declared that, if the Chinese Nationalists were to fall, the US must be prepared to accept eventual Soviet hegemony over Asia.
In point of time, however, one can find the specific civilian proposition from the US Ambassador in Paris a week earlier, on 11 December, not only to extend aid to Vietnam from the President's special $75 m. fund but also recommending direct ‘Marshall plan’ financing for Indo-China: which the French had tentatively asked for at the beginning of 1949.
For France, it was a time of economic and even incipient military crisis.
To finance the French war effort in 1949 had cost them, in US terms, $500 m. — which was greater than the estimated French budgetary deficit for the year — and had eaten up over two-thirds of the annual total of US aid to France.
France was maintaining an army of 150,000 men in Indo-China, of whom, by the end of 1949, 16,000 were killed or missing.
They were already in some difficulty in northern Tonkin, where they had abandoned some of their isolated posts, so that, once again , it was the presence of China — shadow, perhaps, rather than substance — which was helping to transform the appreciations and perception of the struggle.
Already, in effect, US military commanders — in this case, the commander of US naval forces in the Western Pacific — were testifying to the domino effect: if Chinese communists were not stopped in South China, Indo-China, Burma, and perhaps Malaya, would then fall, either from internal subversion or external attack.
Appearing before a Senate committee that was pondering ‘the general area’ of China and its implications, an official of the State Department said of the fund: ‘It might be used in other areas of the Far East which are affected by the developments in China.
That would include such areas as Burma, the northern part of Indo-China, if it became desirable to suppress communism in that country.’
As  the same study of the executive and legislative roles in the Vietnam war points out, another of the provisions of the 1949 Mutual Defense Assistance Act — approved with almost no debate — authorized the President to send US armed forces as non-combatant military advisers to any ‘agency or nation’ in the world.
For the moment, however, it was not military advisers that the French wanted, but other types of military assistance, some of it symbolic but spectacular.
Thus, French High Commissioner Pignon was hoping for American assistance in replacing and repairing military equipment; said he was prepared for US military aid to go direct to the Vietnam government; but also, in order to deter a Chinese invasion of Tonkin, was trying to talk the US into sending warships, particularly aircraft-carriers, into Indo-Chinese waters.
Above all, however, the French had two objectives.
First, to secure recognition of the Bao Dai ‘government’ by as many countries as possible.
Second, to obtain recognition, as French Foreign Minister Schuman put it in tripartite talks with the Americans and the British in September, 1949, that the French were the hard core of resistance to communist attempts to take over, initially, Indo-China and ultimately all of Southeast Asia and that as France was fighting the battle of all the democratic powers she would need help.
NO ALTERNATIVE: THE BAO DAI SOLUTION
The recognition of Bao Dai's government was a problem not only for the French.
For the US or Britain to have been the first to recognize Bao Dai would, said Acheson, have been to give him the kiss of death.
The British opinion, for what it was worth, was that by no stretch of the imagination was Bao Dai's régime in de facto control (they also warned the Americans that Schuman would claim that the French had gone as far as they could in Vietnam without creating trouble in French North Africa).
In spite of these hesitations, with no one anxious to recognize Bao Dai first, not least because the French themselves had not even ratified the Elysee agreement, the US hoped, or wished to persuade itself, that full Vietnamese sovereignty would emerge from the chrysalis of the Bao Dai solution and as Acheson defined the US position on 23 December l949: ‘There is no apparent alternative to Bao Dai regime other than Commie domination Indo-China’.
The fact that China and the USSR recognized Ho Chi Minh before the US recognized Bao Dai is sometimes taken as cause and effect; but on closer inspection the sequence does not seem to bear that much significance.
Acheson, at least, had practically made up his mind as soon as the French had promised to ratify  the Elysee agreements; and in setting out the arguments to the US Embassy in Bangkok no alternative to recognition was in fact suggested.
The Southeast Asian states themselves were reported as having their doubts about Bao Dai's recognition and, eventually, the Thai Foreign Minister, Pote Sarasin, made it the issue on which he resigned.
The fact that the US was canvassing support from other Asian states would very likely have been known to the Russians and Chinese; and it is at least conceivable that this fact influenced their own decision.
In the event, one feels, recognition of Ho Chi Minh's alternative government by the communist bloc was an additional argument for the US to recognize Bao Dai; but it hardly seems to have been a sufficient cause.
AID TO INDO-CHINA
A State Department working party had concluded on 1 February 1950 that the US, together with France, was already committed in Indo-China, i.e., failure of the Bao Dai experiment would mean the communisation of Indo-China.
Failure to support French policy in Indo-China would have the effect of contributing to the defeat of US aims in Europe and, applying the practical test of probability of success, ‘the US would be backing a determined protagonist in this venture…
French military leaders soberly confident’.
To prevent failures of this order, even if success was not absolutely assured, might, other things being equal, have seemed to be within the scope of US policy at the time.
Certainly in the matter of military aid, as the working party concluded, the US (without sending troops) was in a position to make a unique contribution: but even more positive results might have been expected from economic assistance.
Memories were fresh of what it may be fair to call ‘America's failure in China’.
As Charles Wolf points out there had been mounting Congressional criticism of the Administration's alleged neglect of Asia and although the strength of Republican feeling had been resisted in the matter of China it was at the cost of a critical concession in Southeast Asia generally — Vietnam in particular— which accorded, nevertheless, with the sentiments and announced global purposes of US policy: to resist communism, to encourage free peoples throughout the world, and to strengthen democratic nations against aggression.
Aid to Indo-China meant accepting French assurances that Vietnam would become a free state but if doubts occurred, in Congress for example, there was the sheet anchor of general resistance to communism and, in the case of China, and as the influential Congressman Walter Judd explained, a belief that China was the original domino and  that Malaya, Indonesia, the Philippines and even India would not be able to resist communist pressure for long .
In any case fear of the spread of communism reinforced the belief that Asia, too, could benefit from the treasure that was being poured into Europe by way of Marshall Aid and, as Wolf concludes: ‘It is fair to say that the desire to avoid ‘another China’ no less than the desire of the Administration to avoid further Congressional attacks on its Asian policy, determined the timing of US aid to Southern Asia.’
There was also a personal connection.
When, in March 1950 the State Department, under strong Congressional urging, had sent its aid survey mission to Southeast Asia it was headed by Mr R. Allen Griffin, a Californian newspaper publisher and editor, who had been deputy chief of the US Aid Mission to China.
As he told Wolf he saw the mission's task ‘as one of formulating a constructive program of aid to help prevent in Southeast Asia a repetition of the circumstances leading to the fall of China’.
The conclusion of the Griffin mission was, first, that US aid would help France and Vietnam to checkmate Chinese communist invasion, if it came; and second, it was assumed that it would somehow ‘sterilise areas of Vietminh infection’.
As subsequently printed, the purpose of aid programmes in Southeast Asia was ‘to demonstrate that the local national governments are able to bring benefits to their own people and thereby build political support, especially among the rural population’, or in the words of the Country Report prepared for the director of the Mutual Defense Assistance Program: ‘to ensure the existence of governments…which represent the legitimate nationalist aspirations of those Indo-Chinese people who do not desire to see communist-orientated governments in Indo-China’.
Aid, therefore, in a sense, appeared to be a substitute for analysis: certainly for the sort of analysis that might have suggested the hazards attending US policy objectives in Vietnam.
Doubts were expressed in Washington; but in spite of Griffin's assertion that the wave of communist risings in Indo-China were not economic, social or ideological, rather they were predominantly nationalistic, he concluded that it was because the Bao Dai government was itself so intensely nationalist that it was worth supporting.
On 4 May 1950, three days after Truman had approved programmes of military assistance to Indo-China (and to Indonesia) with $13 m. worth of funds which Acheson himself was to approve, Griffin was raising his sights.
It was doubtful, he said, whether the Vietnamese government could succeed without the most generous, if not passionate, French assistance; and yet how France's partners within the French Union could evolve had never been defined: indeed no one knew what the French Union meant.
The Bao Dai government's first need was public respect — which Griffin thought could be created — but, in what had undertones of a Humpty Dumpty argument, Griffin said  ‘If Bao Dai once starts slipping it will be impossible to restore him.’
It was obviously an extremely fragile position: and this was an extremely fragile argument: but it was also one which would seem to require an unlimited US commitment.
In any event, Acheson had realized that the US bargaining position with the French disappeared ‘the moment we agree to give them aid’ and, as if to confirm this predicament, a couple of days after Truman's cabinet had decided unanimously in favour of recognition, the French were letting it be known that, although their intentions were indeed evolutionary, they could not ‘afford to kindle unrealistic national appetites’.
So, once again, having committed itself to support the fictional or, at most , ‘evolutionary’ independence of Vietnam, the US was just as dependent as ever on France to make this vision a reality.
Of course, if it were true, as the State Department and eventually the National Security Council professed to believe, that the threat of communist aggression against Indo-China was only one phase of anticipated plans to seize all of Southeast Asia, then this was an unthinkable alternative.
Perhaps by this time the general had submerged the particular.
For example, the Vietminh were now identified as ‘forces of communist aggression’ and for Dean Rusk, Deputy Under Secretary of State, the danger of communist domination of Southeast Asia was a consequence of ‘aggression’(whatever that meant) from communist China.
Rusk, who appeared to be setting the pace, had asked the Pentagon to prepare military plans as a matter of the greatest urgency; and when NSC 64 was endorsed by the President on 24 April 1950 the US was committed, by all practical measures, to prevent the expansion of communist aggression in Southeast Asia in spite of the fact that less than a third of Vietnam was reckoned to be controlled by the legal government.
So, when on 8 May Acheson announced that the US would send economic and military aid to the French in Indo-China (for Gaddis Smith, the turning point —‘the scales had swayed for three months and then came down hard on the side of France) the French position was at least potentially desperate and one cannot help asking whether there were any countries receiving military aid under the Mutual Defense Assistance Program, other than Vietnam, in which there were such powerful revolutionary forces and where a revolutionary war was already in progress.
Henceforth, of course, there would be a need to promote Vietnam to the position of an established, legitimate and more or less popular state deserving of US assistance.
Whether or not it was realized, then, how exposed the French position was in Vietnam, the universal scope of US foreign policy had just been restated in its most monumental form.
In response to the President's request for a re-examination of US objectives ‘in Peace and war’ and their effect on strategic plans, and with the background of the development of thermo-nuclear weapons, the Secretaries of State and  Defense had produced a paper which was approved by the National Security Council: NSC 68.
In it was set down the ‘The Fundamental Purpose Of The United States’ and ‘The Fundamental Design Of The Kremlin' together with their ‘Underlying Conflict In The Realm Of Ideas And Values’.
Attacked by its critics as a sort of institutional megalomania in which a defeat of free institutions anywhere was a defeat everywhere it was a supercharged containment policy in which, in defence of the perimeter, all points seemed to be of equal importance.
As Robert Lovett, former Under Secretary of State, told the drafting committee, there was practically nothing that the US could not do if it wanted to.
He also advised that the paper's conclusion should be stated ‘simply, clearly, in Hemingway sentences’ and amongst these conclusions was the contingency that, within the next four or five years, the USSR would be able to deliver a surprise atomic attack against the US.
In the midst of a world crisis of such magnitude and given the ‘dangerous potentialities’ of the USSR for weakening the relative world position of the US, ‘sufficient resistance’that was required from the US and other non-communist countries might be presumed to extend to Indo-China.
More particularly, and because Vietnam had already been accorded the key position in Southeast Asia, ‘Soviet domination of the potential power of Eurasia, whether achieved by armed aggression or by political and subversive means, would be strategically and politically unacceptable to the US’.
Indeed, Indo-China had already been identified, together with Korea, Berlin and Austria, as a primary area of Soviet interest.
As a simple response one might expect that the US could try to frustrate this Soviet purpose.
In principle, therefore, there was now a global US policy even if, in Vietnam, it depended upon a French surrogate, and when Acheson and Schuman met face to face, after apparently unrecorded or at least so far undisclosed conversation, Acheson wanted to establish a close and immediate connection between the problem of Southeast Asia and the defence of the West.
The most obvious connection was, of course, France itself and on most occasions which presented themselves the French told the Americans of their difficulties and requirements in Indo-China, how many of their troops were there and, usually, how many they had lost.
In this instance Schuman described Vietnam in terms of financial and military haemorrhage, a burden that France could not be expected to carry indefinitely and one which threatened her ability to meet European defence commitments.
France, as he put it, was not fighting for selfish interests but was defending a vital area against communist infiltration and control and, to underline the point, Schuman emphasized that, since the Second World War, France had definitely abandoned colonialism; although what the new policy of the French Union amounted to remained to be seen — and understood.
If Acheson had any doubts, he kept them to himself.
The official line was that ‘true character of French concessions to Indo-Chinese nationalism and ultimate intentions are clear to Department’ and it was for this reason that no further substantive concessions involving parliamentary action in France were called for at that time.
Although the French may have persuaded themselves that they were moving as fast as they could towards the ‘perfection’ of Vietnamese independence, it was perhaps indulgent of Acheson to have allowed himself to be persuaded as well.
Even if the US kept up the pressure, would public statements from France about her intentions be enough? particularly in view of what they had told the US so far?
Could the French have moved faster?
Did they want to?
Were they able to?
Perhaps there was a glimmer of hope in 1949 when someone of the stature (rather than the disposition) of de Gaulle might have seized the burning brand; and four years later Mendès France could face the unacceptable although by then there was practically no alternative.
Before the Americans were irrevocably committed, however, and before the French positions on the Chinese frontier were overrun, they could conceivably have strengthened non-communist national forces in Vietnam to the point where they had a better chance of competing with the Vietminh or even, biting on the bullet, the French could have tried to negotiate a settlement, no matter what alarm that prospect might have caused their American allies.
Given the importance of the French holding their part of the line in Southeast Asia the threat of a settlement was itself sufficient to elicit renewed US support.
If it wasn't exactly political pessimism of the order of ‘mourir pour Danzig’ it must have been alarming for Americans to hear from High Commissioner Pignon's diplomatic adviser of the feeling that French interests were not important enough to die for because the country was being given over to the Vietnamese and when the war was over French influence would have disappeared.
According to this argument French troops had to see that they were fighting for something and, moreover, they needed the feeling that their actions were approved.
For the French, who declared that old-style exploitation of colonies was a thing of the past, all that they said was necessary were economic and social programmes to dissipate ‘the racial hatred that was drummed up by immature political leaders’.
It was not an argument that one could apply to Vietnam without swallowing hard.
And it was hardly one which appealed to Emperor Bao Dai, no matter what one may have thought of his political maturity.
When the American chargé at Saigon (Edmund Gullion) called on him in June he said he had returned to Vietnam because of French assurances that seemed to promise independence.
‘But’, apparently on the verge of tears, he asked, ‘this independence, what is it?
Where is it?
Do you see it?
Is a government independent without a budget?
When it has to beg 20 m. piastres a month for its existence?’
He no longer thought the French had any intention of leaving Vietnam.
Years later, Acheson agreed in an interview that the French had blackmailed the US in Vietnam.
It was the expression which Bao Dai had used in June 1950 although, as the Americans reported He understood our delicate position since France was our friend in Europe'.
But if the French had threatened to withdraw their troops it was, said Bao Dai, pure blackmail; and the Americans had fallen for it.
On the other hand, as Acheson said in his memoirs, there are limits on the extent to which one may successfully coerce an ally.
When US assistance for the French in Vietnam was announced on the same day as the ‘Schuman Plan’ that was to merge coal and steel production in France and Germany ‘and thus make war between the two countries not only unthinkable but materially impossible’, it was the prospect of strengthening France, and Germany, in the defence of Western Europe that filled Acheson's political landscape.
THE MELBY-ERSKINE MISSION
The fact that the US announced its continuing if not open-ended assistance for the French in Vietnam on the same day as the Schuman plan began Germany's rehabilitation in Europe was, obviously, a coincidence in spite of any gratitude which the US might have felt for this imaginative and, at the same time, practical French gesture.
Six weeks later when the Korean War erupted the focus of Acheson's attention turned to the other side of the world but the concept of all-round defence meant that, for the US, strengthening France and Germany was now even more important in a Europe which, if strong enough, might deter communist aggression and in Asia where the aggression had already begun.
Up to this point the US had been binding itself to Vietnam with conceptual associations, policy objectives, and some material considerations.
The purposes were essentially prophylactic, contingent, and, in spite of official exaggeration, somewhat confused by the absence of what could clearly be identified as ‘communist aggression’.
All this was removed by the Korean War.
There is no real reason to believe that the civil-military mission which the US sent to Vietnam would, in any event, have come to substantially different conclusions but the fact remains that their report was made under the impact of the Korean War and as one of its leaders said of the other his thoughts seemed largely to be  with ‘his’ division in Korea.
Wherever they were General Erskine's thoughts were certainly not in accord with the French in Vietnam.
Why, he asked, listen to a bunch of second-raters who hadn't won a war since Napoleon?
The Melby — Erskine mission had been sent to Vietnam to consider the feasibility of a US economic and military aid programme.
The first problem, which obviously reflected the Korean events, was defence of the frontier against external aggression.
The second was the problem of internal security.
Its agreed conclusions were a curious mixture and although, no doubt, reflecting the position as they found it, hardly provided the foundation for an unequivocal policy.
Thus, a military solution was seen as a primary requisite for solving the overall Indo-China problem; but one that in no sense could be decisive without what the report called ‘the application of political and economic techniques’.
In general terms, it was nicely balanced.
There was a mutual absence of good faith on the part of the French and the Vietnamese; nevertheless, they had to be persuaded to rise above their parochial interests.
After the event Melby was far more pessimistic: ‘the sickening feeling that this was China all over again' and if, as he allowed, that in Indo-China French colonial policy was as intransigent as ever it may well have been reciprocated as High Commissioner Pignon and General Carpentier both admitted to Melby ‘privately and with great reluctance that hatred of the French outweighed all other considerations in the thinking of all Vietnamese, whatever their political persuasions’.
If it did, and even allowing for Melby's overwhelming dilemma, it is a little surprising to read his conclusion that, if the French were really serious about decolonization and that if military force was properly applied, they could at least hold the lid on the Indo-Chinese kettle for the predictable if only relatively limited future.
Beyond that his proposals were extraordinary even if they were conditional.
I would propose the following: a French undertaking for Vietnamese independence within a specified period of five, ten, twenty, or thirty years…
A Vietnam national army would be rapidly created to assume responsibility for the internal situation and as this progressed French forces would withdraw to border areas or where unnecessary depart.
Civil administration would be increasingly a Vietnamese responsibility.
All such agreements would have a US guarantee and such supervision as necessary.
Assumably the US would pay most of the bills…
What is perhaps most surprising about this prescription is the assumed validity of the Bao Dai government.
It was matched, operationally, by General Erskine's conviction that the Chinese border could be made impregnable and the coastline sealed off to prevent external aid reaching the Vietminh; although it was admitted this could not be done with existing forces on the border.
Erskine therefore forwarded what he described as a local suggestion that Japanese troops ‘experienced in warfare in this kind of terrain' might be used.
Then, ‘once border sealed Vietminh problem would be immeasurably simpler with proper combination of military and political activity.’
Commenting on Melby's ‘pessimistic but valuable appraisal’ the US Minister at Saigon (Heath) felt it necessary to balance it with local French military opinion that, barring Chinese intervention or a massive increase in their aid to the Vietminh, guerrilla and terrorist activities could be reduced to a policing problem within two years.
This, in the event, was wildly optimistic: but it was, by contrast with Melby's extraordinary projection, what the State Department's Policy Planning Staff considered as the maximum period which France would have to grant independence if it were to satisfy ‘genuine nationalism’ in Indo-China.
Capitalizing on the Melby report they suggested that Paris should pass a large measure of responsibility for the Indo-Chinese problem to the UN: thus enlisting wider support from free Asian countries and perhaps even inhibiting Chinese communist support for Ho Chi Minh.
Their memorandum on US policy towards Indo-China recognized the possibility that without what it called ‘a bolder political approach’ the French — and the US — might well be heading into a debâcle which neither could afford; but the drastic political measures which were reckoned to be necessary would have to be a matter for voluntary decision by the French government.
Direct Chinese intervention at this time, mid-August 1950, did not loom large and, in any event, there was a cryptic reference (or perhaps unexamined idea) to ‘international surveillance of the border’.
When Melby had suggested special compensations for the French in the course of their anticipated decolonization these had, curiously, been linked to their undertaking ‘to guarantee inviolability of Indo-China border’.
Such a guarantee, had it even been considered, would almost certainly have been worthless and, as the events which were unfolding were to prove, was totally beyond the abilities of the French command in Indo-China.
For whatever reason, the French failed either to withdraw their forces from what were intended as border strongholds or to reinforce them sufficiently to be able to withstand attacks from Vietminh forces which could now be launched at divisional strength trained and commensurately equipped by the Chinese communist armies which had reached the frontier the year before.
After disaster at Dongkhe, and the horrors of the Cocxa gorge, the French fortresses at Caobang, Langson and Laokay were abandoned but, in their retreat, the French had lost 6,000 men in what has been called their greatest colonial defeat since Montcalm had died at Quebec.
They had also lost an estimated 11,000 tons of munitions at Langson; and it was said that almost everything that the Vietminh fired at the French in after years came from that remarkable prize.
THE CHINESE SHADOW
The French had obviously suffered a debâcle but, in itself, the opening up of the frontier with China might only have been a prelude to Chinese invasion and ensuing catastrophe.
The shadow of Chinese intervention now darkened French and US assessments, even before Chinese intervention became a reality in Korea.
France was in enough trouble already with her Vietminh opponents: to the point where her second most senior General, de Lattre de Tassigny, wartime commander of the French First Army, was detached from his command of French and other allied forces in Europe and arrived in Vietnam in December 1950 to assume the dual function of High Commissioner and Commander-in-Chief with the immediate responsibility of saving Hanoi.
The war had been transformed.
It would not be long before de Lattre faced the divisions of Giap's new model army in the set-piece battles which the Vietminh were prepared to risk in a premature general offensive; and it was in more conventional war of this kind where US assistance and particularly US munitions would apparently tip the scale.
For example, when faced with the large-scale Vietminh attacks of early 1951 the personal intervention of the chief US military adviser on Vietnam with General MacArthur in Japan secured the delivery of American napalm, which in turn allowed de Lattre to claim his victory.
On a less spectacular level French defence minister Moch had admitted, or attempted to persuade his opposite number, General Marshall, and Acheson, that with the bulk of French battalions on garrison duties in the pacified areas in Vietnam, they were left with an effective mobile force of only five or six battalions.
And this, as he put it, to face, in addition to guerrillas, 50 fully equipped enemy infantry battalions equipped with liberal amounts of artillery and mortars.
Although the French would send out another five battalions plus 1,100 French officers and NCOs as cadres and instructors for new Vietnamese units — almost inevitably Moch emphasized the possible effects on the military programme for metropolitan France — General Marshall pointed out that all the material for Indo-China was in fact coming from what the US was supplying to France itself.
ONE WAR?
There was now therefore a de facto alliance between France and the US in Vietnam.
It was becoming obvious that the French by  themselves were quite incapable of making the economic and military effort to fight a decisive war even if, at this stage, such a thing had been possible.
Politically, too, it is worth remembering that, as the American Embassy in Paris reported, the Pleven cabinet faced a dozen problems, any one of which was capable in normal times of causing the downfall of two or three French governments.
The outbreak of the Korean War and, even more, the intervention of Chinese armies would allow France to persuade the US that Vietnam really was part of one allied operation.
Not only must the battle for Southeast Asia be fought in Tonkin, as General Juin told the Americans in Saigon, but as de Lattre was to present his case in Washington, it was not his war but our war.
For the US the problem was more complicated.
First of all they were becoming involved, also de facto , in the process of French decolonization which, like any successful retreat, was more difficult than an advance.
Limited,de jure , to an aid programme, it was to assist something that was not yet there: an independent Vietnamese nation state.
In practice, at least in South-East Asia, it made all the difference whether aid was given before or after independence.
The Dutch, for example, had what at least from their own point of view were admirable and generous plans for what might have turned out to be an independent Indonesia; but, like the French, had failed to persuade their Republican adversaries that their ultimate freedom was assured in European hands.
They had on two occasions tried to pre-empt the issue and had, in so doing, lost not only the confidence but the indispensable economic assistance of the US.
Now, however, the French, no matter what they might have thought of American rhetoric, could at least pretend that they took it seriously and that their actions were being taken in defence of‘the free world’.
Faced, therefore, with the apparent metamorphosis of a colonial war and continuing French sacrifices for what were now declared to be American purposes, the US had succeeded in trapping itself.
France was neither oblivious of nor indifferent to the outcome of the war which she was fighting and for which, as the US kept saying,she was primarily responsible; but to have had a chance of winning at that stage it would probably have had to be a French rather than a Vietnamese war.
Although, if it was a French war, might it also be assumed that the Vietnamese, whose tendency to sit on the fence was the subject of American as well as French complaint, would want to join in with the same enthusiasm that they would give to a national cause?
If not, did the Vietnamese have that much chance of winning as a national army?
When would the French be able to hand over to them?
Indeed, given the fact that they were in the middle of a war the balance of which they were afraid might tip disastrously against them, would they really have opted out other than by a deliberate political decision which would not be taken until well into the future?
This was a decision that would be taken after a climactic battlefield disaster but in the meantime two alternatives were to hand.
Either the US could allow themselves to be convinced that they were fighting one war, in Vietnam and Korea; that with practically unlimited US military and economic assistance the French could defeat the main Vietminh forces in Tonkin; and that revolution or insurgency could be contained in the rest of the country.
Or, the US could try to overcome the political disability of association with what was at least a latent French colonial enterprise; as midwife help to bring the independent state of Vietnam into existence; and, as godfather, protect and support it in a cruel world.
Either of these looked like a possibility and both were tried: but whichever course was being followed seemed to lead to closer and closer involvement.
For example, relations with the Emperor Bao Dai, who was to be told on Acheson's instructions, when he arrived back in Saigon in October 1950, that many people including a great number of Americans, had been unable to understand the reasons for his ‘prolonged holiday’ on the French Riviera and had indeed misinterpreted it as an indication of lack of patriotic attachment to his role of Chief of State.
Specifically, it was to be suggested that he should embark upon an immediate programme of visits to all parts of Vietnam making numerous speeches and public appearances in the process.
Or, as it was being discussed in Washington at the time, it was a matter of holding Bao Dai's feet to the fire.
It seems to have been assumed, however, that His Majesty would have acquiesced in a suggestion that he should invite the US to train the Vietnamese army and although the suggestion, like Acheson's message, was not carried through because of political sensitivity the US was becoming involved in the war one way and another.
In Saigon, for example, the US Minister was urging that his country's influence must be felt ‘not only through the gravitational pull of our aid program but in actual participation in certain controls and in accelerating certain French concessions’.
Not only was US advice on war plans to be sought and heeded but ‘we should give our views on organization and training of army and advancement of senior Viet officers’ and there should also be some Franco-American rather than Vietnamese control over the ‘dilatory fiscal collections’of Vietnam.
An apparent opportunity for, or at least inclination to, US participation in Vietnamese national affairs as suggested in Saigon was soon to become a recognized imperative in Washington: and when the French ministers arrived in October 1950 to ask how much could be expected from the US to avoid financial disaster it was the drain of resources in Vietnam as much as the problems of French rearmament in Europe which prompted a close examination of French budgetary as well as military plans.
The French were in fact asking for 270 billion francs and it was hard to see how the  distinction could be made between helping to improve the French position in Europe and the position in Vietnam.
France was an ally of the US and it was as such that she was to receive the greater part of the half a billion dollars in military assistance for the Far East which had been appropriated by Congress.
When it was announced by the State Department on 17 October that military equipment, including light bombers, was being supplied for the armed forces both of France and of the Associated States, it was a distinction without a difference because in practice it was the French who were in control: even if Bao Dai was insistent that the French officers who were to train the soldiers of the Vietnamese national army should be responsible directly to him rather than to the French High Command.
The divergence and even the incompatibility of purposes between France and the US had certainly occurred to various officers of the State Department and prompted sarcastic comment.
But the dilemma remained and had left the US with the choice of two ghastly courses of action.
‘Either we wash our hands of the country and allow the Communists to overrun it; or to continue to pour treasure (and perhaps eventually lives) into a hopeless cause…at a cost of alienating vital segments of Asian public opinion.’
It was, obviously, a monstrous dilemma and although Ogburn in the State Department was concerned that the Congressional Foreign Relations Committees should not be misled, his suggestion of periodic cocktail parties with non-communist Asians seemed to offer only slight relief.
In any event, at the higher level Rusk announced that the independence of the Associated States of Indo-China within the framework of the French Union was now assured, even if this did mean squaring the circle or at least begging the question.
A similar attempt to draw attention to an approaching commitment that was so deep that it might even lead to direct US intervention was made by the Deputy Director of the Mutual Defense Assistance Program, John Ohly, in a long and thoughtful paper which he submitted through Rusk to Acheson.
Ohly, without being absolutely sure, thought that US foreign policy was wrong and was at least in need of urgent re-examination.
Substantial aid to Indo-China might, without achieving its intended purpose, make impossible the fulfilment of US mutual defence objectives elsewhere in the world.
To continue without a far more searching analysis than had so far been made would have been the height of folly.
The US, because of limitations in resources, could no longer simultaneously pursue all of its objectives in all parts of the world.
Certain objectives might have to be abandoned if others of even greater value and importance were to be attained.
As it was, however, the US was slowly, and not too slowly, getting itself into a position where its responsibilities tended to supplant rather than complement those of the French: and this was something which at least had to be offset against all the delays that would ensue in European rearmament.
As with the Ogburn paper it was a matter of incisive and impeccable analysis rather than recommendation.
Ohly's proposal was for an assessment by a special task force before any further substantial commitments were made in Indo-China but, coming as it did, a month after the US had made its half-a-billion-dollar commitment, it was probably too late.
In any case although Acheson in his memoirs acknowledged the ‘perceptive warning of an able colleague’ and admitted that these fears were eventually borne out by events, at the time he decided nonetheless ‘that having put our hand to the plough we would not look back’and added his own to what would be hundreds of similarly hopeful assessments.
‘Moreover, the immediate situation appeared to take a turn for the better’.
What Acheson had in mind, principally, was the agreement to create a Vietnamese National Army; a hopeful assessment of the agreement that had been reached after the long-drawn-out negotiations at Pau to turn local administration over to the Vietnamese early in 1951 (although, as Acheson notes, the transfer date kept being postponed) and de Lattre's appointment to Indo-China.
There were, however, other and less hopeful signs that the French were not in fact going to make any substantial concessions.
According to Letourneau, the Vietnamese looked on concessions as weakness and would only ask for more.
According to de Lattre, France had spent too much blood and treasure for the Vietnamese to expect the sort of independence that was to be found in the British Commonwealth.
And there was still the absurd question of protocol involved in who should occupy the Presidential Palace in Saigon which was turning into a long-running farce and one that was unlikely to be resolved in Bao Dai's favour as long as de Lattre was High Commissioner.
In the meantime, the US Joint Chiefs of Staff were giving their professional opinion how the French were to win the war and what the US would and would not do.
The JCS were already on record that the US should assume ‘positive and proper leadership’ among the Western powers in Southeast Asia in order, as they put it, with no excessive modesty, ‘to retrieve the losses resulting from previous mistakes on the part of the British and the French, as well as to preclude such mistakes in the future.’
Their recommendations to the Secretary of Defense, General Marshall, in November 1950 were yet more overweening and ingenuous, even if the imperative form was unintentional.
Having decided for themselves that the problem lay in the lack of will and determination on the part of the Indo-Chinese to join whole-heartedly with the French in resisting communism, the US had to obtain assurances from the French that a programme of French government will be developed; national armies will be organized; France will despatch sufficient additional armed forces to Indo-China to insure that the restoration of peace and internal security will be accomplished in accordance with the timetable of  the overall military plan for Indo-China (which made it sound more like a military parade than a war and that the French will eliminate their policy of colonialism.
The emphasis is added here; but even more emphatic was the JCS opinion that, in the event of an overt attack by organized Chinese communist forces in Indo-China, the US should not permit itself to become engaged in a general war with communist China although assistance short of the actual employment of US military forces should be provided.
In this event the American military assistance programme was to be expanded appropriately but, presumably in the meantime, neighbouring states were to be induced to commit their armed forces.
(Chiang Kai-shek was not specifically mentioned but it is hard to think of other forces that might have been available.)
All this, one may presume further, was supposed to supply the missing will and determination of the indigenous people and just in case the French might be feeling a little faint-hearted at the prospect, the US should immediately reconsider its policy at the first sign that the French were planning to give up or even if they planned to take the problem to the UN.
As 1950 ended the National Intelligence Estimate prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency presented a sombre picture of what it was the US had underwritten in Vietnam.
On their own, it was reckoned that the Vietminh in Tonkin, who now outnumbered the French regular forces, could probably drive the French out in six to nine months and there were many indications also of impending Chinese communist intervention.
As 1951 began these indications had become an ‘unavoidable assumption’ on the part of the US minister in Saigon (Heath) who reported that ‘sooner or later and probably soon’Chinese communists will invade Indo-China with organized units, and near panic conditions were reported from the North.
Whether or not, as Heath reported, the Vietnamese were turning increasingly to the US for advice and assistance in a situation where the Governor of Annam wasn't speaking to the Prime Minister — who was being kept on.
for fear that he would start a separatist movement in the south — there was some point to his suggestions that Bao Dai should be better advertised; that he should have an American adviser and that American technicians should give the Vietnamese government a ‘new look’.
Six months later, in June 1951, after de Lattre had halted the Vietminh offensive in Tonkin and with the immediate threat removed, Heath reported from Saigon that the current phase in Indo-China was now to be seen as a holding operation.
This opinion was shared by Robert Blum in his capacity as chief of the American economic mission in Saigon (he was apparently also a CIA officer).
‘Perhaps the best we can hope for is to conduct here a kind of uneasy holding operation until something else happens in another place’— but in most other respects, certainly in conclusions and prescription, they  diverged to the point of confrontation.
For Heath it was a partnership in Indo-China between France and the US, whose interests required loyal and ungrudging although not uncritical support from the US.
It was childish, he said, to think of ousting the French from Indo-China and stemming communism with the means then at hand and, considering the size of the military and economic aid programmes that were available, the pro-American movement could not be built overnight.
Blum, on the other hand, was looking to a more distant future when the French might have to withdraw entirely and in order to maintain the position of influence in the future he believed that the only firm foundation was a break with the past.
In practice this appeared to mean a break with the French and, like many Americans engaged in day-to-day dealings in Vietnam, Blum's frustration had reached the point where he would recommend withdrawing US assistance altogether rather than endlessly humouring the French.
The irritation, if not exasperation, was mutual.
Apart from calling Blum ‘the most dangerous man in Indo-China’ de Lattre complained of all the ‘missionary young men’the US was sending to Vietnam, of the way in which they undermined the idea of the French Union and, as he obviously had time to read the reports as soon as they were sent, he objected strenuously and in person to US correspondents who did not share his more exalted view of France's mission in Indo-China.
Presumably acting on de Lattre's orders, and certainly in keeping with his ideas, French censors altered the more exuberant and less sensitive American publicity releases and, in an extraordinary outburst, at the last moment de Lattre refused to allow the government of Vietnam to sign its economic agreement with the US.
France, he said, must insist on exact compliance with consultation provisions and ‘if the Vietnamese were to be allowed from the start to negotiate and sign international treaties without full prior consultation and approval the foundation and future of the French Union would be in peril.’
This was the first separate treaty to be negotiated and signed by the government of Vietnam and de Lattre's refusal was described as a slap in the face in the report which had caused de Lattre to explode and to consider expelling the American reporter.
Perhaps not surprisingly for some Americans, as Heath reported, it was not the Vietminh who were seen as the enemy but the French.
DE LATTRE'S COMET
At the same time, as de Lattre was to repeat constantly to mostly more important Americans, France was an ally and an ally, moreover, that was not far off the point of victory in Vietnam.
In  Paris in March, 1951 he assured Eisenhower, then Supreme Allied Commander in Western Europe, that with 12 extra infantry battalions plus the Vietnamese army which he was organizing and training, he would repel the anticipated Vietminh mass attack in September and go on to deal them a decisive blow.
That in itself would win the support of a substantial group of Vietnamese fence sitters, and would unite all Vietnamese in solid opposition to Ho Chi Minh; and the Chinese communists, practical people, when they saw their aid resulting in no real accomplishment, would be less ready to see it frittered away.
De Lattre, it seems, had himself in mind as a Supreme Allied Commander for Southeast Asia and his proposals for a joint intelligence operation together with a strategic reserve of six or eight divisions would, if it had come to anything, have meant not only an American but a British commitment to French fortunes in Indo-China.
As it was, de Lattre constantly held out the prospect of Chinese intervention, apparently believing it himself and certainly capitalizing on it in the US.
There was a widespread feeling in 1951 that at any moment the Chinese, who had already identified themselves in US eyes as aggressors in Korea, might extend their intervention to Vietnam.
Thus, a major paper on US military assistance to Southeast Asia to which Rusk gave his name early in 1951 was predicated on ‘the imminence of a communist invasion of that area’.
On closer inspection there was quite a muddle between ‘Chinese imperialism’ and ‘Vietminh military operations’, but it seems to have been an elementary mistake to base the assessment entirely on capability rather than intention, which the paper admitted, and was an extraordinary foundation for Rusk's conclusion which was that: ‘Above all, we cannot afford to jeopardise the considerable measure of success our policy has already had in Indo-China by neglecting to provide the proper maintenance for our investment.’
Reports and assumptions such as this continued, off and on, throughout the year and reached a climax in December 1951 in a memorandum from the acting Assistant Secretary of State (Allison) to Acheson which reported that from various sources and for various reasons, not least the fact that some 200,000 Chinese communist troops in Kwangsi Province were prepared to move on Indo-China as ‘volunteers’, a large-scale attack against French Union and Vietnamese forces in Tonkin must be expected on or about 28 December.
This was remarkably precise and remarkably misleading and seems once again to have been based essentially on Chinese communist capability.
When de Lattre had visited Washington in September 1951 it was this theme, ‘the ability of communist China to invade Indo-China and South-East Asia’ that the State Department had chosen to stress in their briefing for President Truman and their up-beat assessment of the General who had transformed ‘an army  beset with defeatism into a force which has since won every major engagement against the communist forces’.
Truman was reminded that it was an agreed military estimate that if Indo-China falls, ‘very likely all of South-East Asia may come under communist domination’ and, although it might not have seemed a very credible danger, it was pointed out that the Philippines were less than 800 miles from Indo-China.
It does not appear in Heath's brief memorandum of de Lattre's meeting with Truman but de Lattre subsequently claimed to have been very reassured by the President's statement: ‘We would not let Indo-China fall into enemy hands.’
What is certainly on record, however, is de Lattre's ineffable assurance to Acheson that ‘If it were made possible to carry out his present military plans and if there were no Chinese military intervention the Vietminh could be eliminated as a fighting force in a period of between one and two years.’
In regard to his relations with the Vietnamese de Lattre claimed that Bao Dai was the ablest statesman in Vietnam; but perhaps rather spoilt things by adding that there had been several recent instances when Bao Dai ‘had showed the proper co-operative spirit and, in some cases, even initiative’.
The gist of de Lattre's message in Washington was that if the US would give him the tools, he would finish the job.
Brushing aside the major political problem of French colonialism,('there was no reason to discuss the question further') the real problem for de Lattre was guaranteeing priorities on the delivery of equipment.
Putting the question point blank he said ‘Did the US admit that Indo-China was the key-stone in South-East Asia?
If the answer was no, nothing more could be accomplished; if yes, the US must provide the weapons to make continued resistance possible.’
As de Lattre presented his case, his plan to construct 1200 bunkers of the Siegfried Line-type (one wonders why its French counterpart was not mentioned instead) was to provide against future Chinese attacks but, on the assumption that the Chinese might be deterred, French success seemed to be simply a matter of US munitions and confidence and, although it might have been misleading as a performance indicator, at the end of his visit to the Pentagon de Lattre was rewarded with Defense Secretary Lovett's assertion that General de Lattre was regarded as a comrade in arms and that the US would do everything they could for him that was within their capabilities.
On his return to Vietnam de Lattre was even more euphoric.
Morale in the Vietminh forces was dropping, Ho's prestige and popularity were waning.
Providing there was no direct Chinese communist intervention he was utterly confident that in one year not only would he have secured the Tonkin Delta but would have completely eradicated the Vietminh from South Vietnam so that, by the spring of 1953, the Vietminh revolt would have been stamped out.
It was, of course, one thing to talk up such confidence, either in Saigon  or in Washington, but quite another whether it would be believed.
While a few professional eyebrows were raised, nevertheless, when the US Army Chief of Staff, General Colfins, visited Vietnam he was not only impressed by de Lattre's ‘Siegfried Line’ but told the Joint Chiefs of Staff that unless the Chinese intervened the French and Vietnamese forces should be able to hold Indo-China indefinitely.
In the meantime, he said, the French were making genuine progress in building up native forces although it would be some years before the Vietnamese would be competent to defend themselves.
There was, however, a warning.
This, said Collins, is largely a General de Lattre show.
If anything should happen to him, there could well be a collapse in Indo-China and it was for this reason that Collins recommended that the US should continue to extend military and economic aid ‘in order to check the spread of communism in South-East Asia’— but only as long as de Lattre was in Indo-China.
Two months later de Lattre was dead.
He had blazed like a comet across Vietnam and the light did as much as anything in 1951 to dazzle the US and to persuade them that their assessments were right, that it was the right war and that, on certain conditions, it might also be a winnable war.
But 1951 was also the year in which the climax had not happened because the Chinese did not arrive and all the plans for increasing US assistance, in which this was a contingent but major factor, would in the end go to help the French reinforce their position in Indo-China or, at most, help them to decide the time when they might depart.
As a policy that might have succeeded it suffered from impossible political equivocation.
At the same time as the US sought to stiffen French resolve, at least to continue the war, it had to persuade France in effect to let go because, at the very least, it had recognized that the forces of what was nominally ‘the French Union’ in Indo-China in reality needed men: and these men would have to be found for and fight in the National Army of Vietnam.
The costs for the US would be enormous, indeed the requirement of the French was that the US would pay the entire cost, but money and munitions could be regarded as the essential calipers which might allow the rickety infant to walk; and as long as it had an American account it would grow up and would be able to buy everything that was needed for a new nation state.
Apart from this it was probably true to say that the Truman Administration, well before it came to an end, had run out of ideas on Vietnam; and it is probably true also that at the end of 1951 the weight of the French problem was beginning to shift: not so much how the US could get France out but how to keep her in.
In the meantime, whether or not Acheson's alleged insensitivity to the nationalism of China's leaders could be reckoned to extend southwards to Vietnam and whether or not the evidence suggests European rather than Asian priorities, Truman's momentous post-war  Democratic Administration, and his partnership with Acheson, had taken the US into the tiger's cage.
For the moment, however, it was France who was riding the tiger and it would be her problem how to dismount.
Whether the US would help her or would decide to take her place were the questions which the next Administration would have to decide.