

Museum of the WELSH WOOLLEN INDUSTRY
Follow the wool from ‘fleece to fabric’.
Experience the past and present of rural Wales' most important industry.
Demonstrations of hand carding, spinning, weaving and dyeing.
Nineteenth century carding and spinning machinery in operation.
Hand and power looms producing reproduction fabrics.
A display of the contemporary products of the Welsh woollen industry.
At the beginning of the century Dre-fach Felindre was the main centre of the Welsh woollen industry with over 40 mills working in the locality.
The Museum is housed in the former Cambrian mills, built in 1902, one of the largest factories in the area.
Part of the building is still used as a working mill.
The Museum houses a comprehensive collection of tools and machinery used in the making of woollen cloth from fleece to fabric.
An interpretive exhibition tracing the evolution of the Welsh woollen industry from its domestic origins to its industrial heyday.
Craft Workshops
MELIN TEIFI
A commercial mill operating in part of the museum building weaving flannels and tweeds developed from local patterns
A full range of traditional and contemporary garments are produced
BRETHYN BRITH
The English translation of the name means ‘Dappled Cloth’, a perfect description of the garments produced using the richly coloured, wool, cotton, silk, and mohair yarns hand dyed in the workshop
STORDY TEIFI
An attractive gallery displaying high-quality crafts produced in the Teifi Valley, including leatherwork, pottery, woodturning, basketry as well as paintings by local artists.
Daily demonstrations of embroidery and quilting during the summer
JANE MANSFIELD HAND MADE PAPER
See paper being made following the traditional method, but using a recycled base to which fragments of plant leaves and petals are added for colour and texture
Factory Trail
Trace the development of the woollen industry in the locality and see its importance to the life of the community by following the ‘factory trails’ through Drefach and the neighbouring villages.
An educating visit
Learn about the processes of making cloth from ‘fleece to fabric’.
See the technology and machinery which started the Industrial Revolution at work.
Try your hand at spinning using ancient tools and methods.
Educational parties catered for
Cafe /Shop
Enjoy a ‘home made’ snack in the cafeteria.
Browse through the books, craft wares and souvenirs in the museum shop
FACILITIES
Car and Coach parking
Toilets
Riverside picnic site
Facilities for the disabled
The craft centre shop
The Makers Guild in Wales
Spoilt for choice…
Welcome to the Craft Centre Shop —— for the best in Welsh crafts
The Craft Centre Shop is an attraction no visitor to Cardiff should miss.
Situated in The Old Library, a magnificent Victorian building right in the heart of the city, the shop offers a spectacular display of some of the finest crafts made by Welsh artists.
Come and enjoy the wide selection of original crafts — from pottery, jewellery, tapestries and silks, to hand-turned wood, clothes sculptures and much more.
The display changes every month, so there's always something new to see.
The Craft Centre Shop is the perfect place to find a truly unique gift (tokens available on request).
Treat yourself to something special, or simply browse at leisure.
We are open from Tuesday–Saturday from 10am until 5.30pm.
To find us, please see the map at the back of this leaflet.
The Makers Guild in Wales
The Craft Centre Shop is run by the Makers Guild in Wales, a group of professional craftspeople whose aim is to promote high quality Welsh crafts.
In 1989, Cardiff City Council invited the Guild to set up a showcase for their work, as part of its temporary arts programme for the Old Library.
The Guild receives financial aid from the Council, and relies heavily on the enthusiasm and dedication of its members.
Since the shop opened in 1989, it has received over 200,000 visitors from all over Britain and overseas.
A member of the Guild is always present to answer any questions you might have about the items on display.
The Old Library — past and present
Cardiff's Free Library, Museum and Schools of Art and Science were built in 1992.
The building was extended in 1896 to accommodate more reading rooms and museum areas — with an arched entrance decorated in glazed tiles depicting ‘night, morning and the four seasons’, designed by Walter Crane.
The entire building was later used as the city's main lending, reference and music libraries.
Since the opening of a new library in 1988, the Old Library has become home to the Craft Centre Shop, an impressive art gallery with varying exhibitions, and to Charles Bird's Museum of Magical Machines — a fascinating spectacle for children of all ages.
Welsh Folk Museum
St Fagans, Cardiff
NATIONAL MUSEUM OF WALES
Welsh Folk Museum
a wealth of tradition and culture
one of Europe's foremost open air museums
The heritage of Wales' rural life is displayed and interpreted in a vast collection of authentic re-erected buildings where the Welsh people lived and worked
St Fagans Castle
The Elizabethan Manor House, built in 1580 within the curtain wall of a medieval castle today reflects the splendour of life in the early 19th century.
It is surrounded by spacious formal gardens, terraces and fish ponds
The fully-furnished re-erected farmhouses, cottages and working buildings each tell their own fascinating story
Rhyd-y-car
The Award Winning terraced houses from Merthyr Tudful portraying life in the Welsh mining community spanning nearly 200 years
Special Interests
No one day is like another with special events, demonstrations and exhibitions to interest a wide range of taste
GWALIA STORES:NEW IN JULY 1991
A 1920s shop experience in a fully-furnished Valleys general store of the period
Skills of the Craftsmen
Craftsmen using traditional tools practise their age old crafts
The water wheel turns the grinding stones of Melin Brompren Flour Mill to produce stone-ground wheat flour which is used at Derwen Bakehouse for baking traditional bread and bara brith (a Welsh delicacy)
At Esgair Moel Woollen Mill all the processes of woollen manufacture are carried out from fleece to flannel
At Llawryglyn Smithy , the blacksmith shapes horse-shoes and farm tools on his anvil
Leather work is practised by the saddler in his country workshop
In the Castle Courtyard the Wood Turner and the Cooper produce their wares for kitchen and dairy and here also, the Clogmaker  practises his craft
A Collection of Treasures
Imaginatively displayed exhibits relating to  everyday life
An elegance of costume style is portrayed along with the furniture and interior decoration of each period to emphasise the close-link that exists between them
Agricultural tools and equipment along with graphic displays relate the story of the Welsh Farming scene
The collection of carts and wagons represent local traditions of craftsmanship
HOW TO FIND US
The Welsh Folk Museum is situated in 100 acres of wooden parkland in the Vale of Glamorgan, 4 miles from Cardiff, Wales' beautiful Capital City
PLANNING YOUR VISIT
Wear comfortable shoes and allow plenty of time.
At the Folk Museum you'll find ample free parking, a choice of restaurants, a coffee tavern and a picnic area
The museum shop offers a wide range of books, gifts, souvenirs, postcards, films etc.
We are happy to welcome disabled visitors and facilities for the disabled include ramps, toilets, loan of invalid chairs and access to almost all areas of the museum
There is a programme of Special Events and Temporary Exhibitions throughout the year.
Further information on these events can be obtained from the Marketing Department
Guide book available 
TECHNIQUEST
1990 winner of Come to Britain Trophy award for Outstanding Tourist Enterprise
Come to Wales' Own Hands-On Science Centre!
Step inside to explore the world of science and technology.
Try things out and discover how things work by ‘playing’ with giant scientific toys.
No-one says ‘Don't touch’ at TECHNIQUEST!
But be prepared for the unexpected — what you thought was impossible may not be!
At TECHNIQUEST you can really have fun with science!
Who Visits?
TECHNIQUEST is designed for people of all ages and abilities — ideal for family outings (Gran will enjoy herself too!), school trips, and special occasions.
Everyone is welcome — you don't need to be a scientist to enjoy TECHNIQUEST!
What You Say!
TECHNIQUEST is a major tourist attraction — with over 150,000 visitors during the first 18 months in Cardiff Bay.
Many of you have been twice or more!
Some of your comments really sum up the TECHNIQUEST experience:
Mum:‘It's the first time I've really understood anything about science and technology — the first time I've really wanted to!’
Teacher:‘…definitely our best ever school visit.’
Youths:‘Brill’, ‘Excellent!’,
‘Wicked Good!’
Student:‘I thought it would just be kid's stuff…
I was really surprised.’
Gran:‘This place is great, we'll have to come again without the children!’
What Can We Do at TECHNIQUEST?
You'll find over 70 exhibits to choose from, every one different — from fairground mirrors to hi-tec computer challenges.
Want to be the star of a special effects show?
Or to design a ‘computer tree’?
YOU CAN AT TECHNIQUEST!
Create electricity under your own power!
Solve puzzles and break illusions!
Experiment with mirrors and magnets!
You'll learn how aircraft fly, even though you've never heard of Bernoulli!
(Or wanted to!)
‘What’, ‘Why’ and ‘How’will be words often on your lisp.
Come and be amazed — because TECHNIQUEST is exciting, fun and different !
If you visit again, there will always be something new to see.
We're constantly working on new ways to excite you!
Special Events
Watch out for frequent special events: from one-day demos to longer term figures like STARLAB (a guided tour of the night sky inside an inflatable planetarium).
STARLAB presentations and other events occur throughout the year — watch the press for details, or call Cardiff (0222) 460211 for up-to-date information.
Amenities
Our Science Shop is a treasure trove of curiosities, gifts and gadgets.
You'll find inexpensive souvenirs rubbing shoulders with holograms and plasma spheres, a wide choice of books and a selection of specially designed scientific goodies.
Shop here for that really original present!
When it's time for a break, try the TQ Café for hot and cold drinks and light snacks.
If you're planning a trip to TECHNIQUEST be sure to put aside at least an hour and a half.
At busy times like half term and Bank Holidays you'll need longer.
Colwyn Bay
BRITAIN
THIS popular seaside resort, beautifully set on a crescent-shaped sandy bay, has been welcoming visitors since the early days of seaside holidays.
You'll see evidence of Colwyn Bay's Victorian ancestry in its distinctive architecture.
But this is a resort that has moved with the times, and today serves as a superbly-located touring centre for North Wales as well as an entertainment-packed seaside destination.
The resort is now even easier to get to, thanks to the new A55 Expressway.
Colwyn Bay is also looking to the future with its brand-new Colwyn Centre, a superbly-designed covered shopping complex just a stone's throw from the promenade and beach.
And along this spacious, 3-mile promenade there's everything from a traditional pier to unique little puppet theatre, a ‘Dinosaur World’ to gardens and parklands.
Behind the town lie the Pwllycrochan Woods and the famous Welsh Mountain Zoo set in the beautiful Flagstaff Gardens, home of the Zoological Society of Wales.
The Zoo is unique amongst British zoos because of its hilltop setting, and is one of the most beautifully situated in the whole of Europe, where it is possible to see a variety of birds, animals and reptiles, in their natural settings.
A regular bus service operates from Colwyn Bay Station during the holiday season.
Sea Front
The Promenade and the sea front play an important part in the tourist scene of Colwyn Bay, and many facilities are provided in this area including refreshment and souvenir kiosks, children's attractions ranging from bumper cars to pony rides.
A miniature railway links Eirias Park with the pier — an attractive feature stretching out to sea.
Between Colwyn Bay and Rhos Point, the sea is ideally suited to water ski-ing and sailing, and these are extremely popular pastimes.
At your leisure
Whilst the sea front and the Promenade are strong features of Colwyn Bay, they do not have the monopoly of all amenities.
The 50-acre Eirias Park, with entrances from the Promenade and Abergele Road, features a superb modern children's playground, and all the new equipment and the surfaced area meet safety requirements.
Nearby there is an amusement arcade, an attractive boating lake, and a large area set aside for passive recreation which includes a viewing mound providing superb views of the North Wales coastal area.
There are two Crown Bowling Greens where many competitions are held including the George Davies Bowling Tournament (details of all the bowling Competitions available on request).
Miniature and Crazy Golf, Trampolines and Children's roundabouts are provided to add to the enjoyment.
The new all-weather Tennis Courts are also situated in Eirias Park, as well as a Dinosaur World, with life-size prehistoric animals.
The modern Leisure Centre is situated in Eirias Park, and all the family can enjoy a relaxed swim in sparkling clear ozone treated water which eliminates the usual swimming pool odours.
There are ample sporting facilities on offer within the Centre.
Rhos-on-Sea
Rhos-on-Sea where the new breakwater forms its own natural harbour, has a continental atmosphere, and many amenities, such as a Children's paddling pool and par putting.
The Harlequin Theatre situated on the Cayley Promenade is a unique Puppet Theatre, small in size, but strong in quality, where entertainment is provided for both children and adults.
This is an attraction not often found in British resorts, and is well worth a visit.
The Colwyn Bay Cricket Ground is centrally situated in Rhos-on-Sea, and has staged many interesting games — the West Indian Touring Team visited in 1984.
There are many select shops, which open until early evening — in other words, an ideal area for those seeking a quiet relaxing break.
Touring
Ideally situated for touring the North Wales beauty spots such as Snowdonia, Betws-y-Coed, Anglesey, Caernarfon, Porthmadog and the National Trust Bodnant Gardens, to name but a few, Colwyn Bay is also within easy access of the historical Cit of Chester.
For those without a car, there are daily coach tours to enable them to visit the surrounding areas.
The Borough of Colwyn embraces many pretty villages where typical Welsh culture, entertainment and food can be found in the village halls and country inns.
The lovely Llyn Brenig close to Cerrigydrudion, is a new reservoir set in a timeless landscape, where facilities exist for fishing, walking on the moors and bird watching.
Llyn Brenig is situated some 35 miles form Colwyn Bay, and is well worth a visit.
To the east of Colwyn Bay lies the attractive market town of Abergele, together with Pensarn, Towyn and Kinmel Bay.
These easterly areas cater predominantly for caravans, camping and chalets, offering the tourist many facilities and entertainment.
Although there are many amusements, shops, bars and clubs, in fact everything which proves a lively atmosphere, those holidaymakers seeking a more relaxed environment, will be well satisfied on discovering the sandy beaches of Pensarn, Towyn and Kinmel Bay, where easy access by car and on foot is a feature.
Out and About
Colwyn Bay is a convenient touring centre for North Wales.
Here are some ideas for places to visit:
Bodnant Gardens — Considered to be one of the finest gardens in Britain, Bodnant has a magnificent collection of rhododendrons, camelias, magnolias and conifers.
Home of Lord Aberconwy, a National Trust Property.
The gardens are open to the public from March to end October, 10 a.m. –5 p.m.
At Glan Conwy Corner take the A470.
Approximately three miles from Glan Conwy signposted on the left for Bodnant and Eglwysbach.
Approximately 14 miles.
No pushchairs or dogs admitted.
Gloddfa Ganol and LLechwedd Slate Caverns, Blaenau Ffestiniog — Blaenau Ffestiniog — Blaenau Ffestiniog was once the slate capital of the world.
The fascinating story of slate is recounted at these new centres, and you can also explore the underground chambers and tunnels, watch the slates being split and learn about the working lives of the quarrymen.
Both slate quarries are open daily April to October, 100.00 a.m. –5.30 p.m.
Do wear warm clothing.
Take the Conwy road to Glan Conwy Corner, proceed on the A470 via Llanrwst.
After approximately 4 miles take a left turning, skirting the entrance to Betws-y-Coed, then right, following A470 for Dolwyddelan through the lovely Lledr Valley.
As you drop down into Blaenau Ffestiniog from the heights of the Crimea Pass, the entrance to Gloddfa Ganol is on the right, lower down on the left is Llechwedd.
Llangollen — In this small town, astride the Dee, is held the Annual International Eisteddfod during the first week in July.
Take A55 to St. Asapah, skirt bottom of Denbigh and go on through to Ruthin from which A525 will lead you through the delightful Nantygarth Pass.
Turn right onto the A542 and enjoy panoramic views from the top of the famous Horseshoe Pass before dropping down into Llangollen.
Here are the ruins of Valle Crucis Abbey.
An attractive route home is to follow the A5 via Corwen, Cerrigydrudion, Pentrfoelas, and joining the A470 near Betws-y-Coed, proceed through Llanrwst and Glan Conwy Corner.
Approximately 90 miles overall.
Landscape of Castles
There are no fewer than eighty castles to visit in Wales, and the northern part has a fair share of these daunting fortresses.
Caernarfon Castle — Probably the most famous.
Build for King Edward I, work commencing in 1283 and continuing for approximately four years.
Setting for Investiture of present Prince of Wales.
Contains Military Museum.
Take coastal route through Conwy, Penmaenmawr and Llanfairfechan.
By-passing Bangor, leave dual carriageway at exit for Caernarfon.
Conwy Castle — Another impressive site at the mouth of the Conwy estuary, also created in 1283 for Edward I, with a still fairly complete line of town walls.
Large car park nearby.
Take coastal road through Llandudno Junction.
Beaumaris Castle — Overlooking the Menai Strait, Beaumaris is one of the few Welsh castles with a moat.
Building was never fully completed.
A good vantage point to survey Snowdonia and the coast.
Take coastal route as far as Caernarfon, leave dual carriageway at Bangor exit, follow route for Holyhead.
Cross the Strait by Menai Suspension Bridge.
At second traffic island following sign to Beaumaris.
Penrhyn Castle — More of a stately home than a castle, Penrhyn is a modern Victorian structure in Norman style.
Natural history collection, doll's museum and industrial locomotive museum.
Open Easter to October.
Follow coastal route and leave dual carriageway at Bangor exit.
This will bring you to Llandegai Corner and the imposing gates of the castle grounds.
Rhuddlan Castle — Edward I strategically placed this castle beside the river Clwyd and on the main coast route into North Wales.
Open all year.
Take the A55 to St. Asaph, exit for Rhyl, follow A525 to Rhuddlan.
Denbigh Castle and Town Walls — Overlooking the town, this castle was built between 1282 and 13333.
Its most notable feature is the sturdy triangular gatehouse.
Open all year.
Take A55 to St. Asaph, and then A525 in direction of Ruthin.
Our Christian Heritage
St. Trillo — On the foreshore at Rhos-on-Sea stands a tiny chapel, built over a holy well.
It is believed the chapel was built on this spot by monks at the beginning of he 16th century.
St. Trillo was a celtic saint of the sixth century.
St. Asaph — One of the smallest cities in Britain the existing cathedral buildings date from the thirteenth century.
The Marble Church, Bodelwyddan — A prominent landmark on the road between St. Asaph and Abergele.
The beautifully elegant spire rises to a height of 202 ′.
St. Winifride's Well, Holywell — One of the traditional ‘seven wonders of Wales’, a place of pilgrimage for centuries.
Dedicated to a 7th century saint.
The Happy Fisherman
The pleasures of the fisherman are simple:
Winter fishing rights are held by the Colwyn Bay's Victoria Sea Angling Clubs .
Visiting anglers are allowed temporary membership.
The club organises the Welsh Open Bass Competition held in the Bay of Colwyn during September; and fishing out in the bay even inside the 3-fathoms line brings in tope, ray and prime gurnard.
Mackerel shoals run into the bay from early July to September.
Llyn Brenig
First for Fishing and Family Fun…
Brenig is the finest trout fishery in Wales stocked annually with over 21,000 trout and boasting a fleet of 42 quality boats.
For the family there is a free exhibition of all aspects of the reservoir and its wildlife, whilst youngsters can face the challenge of the adventure playground.
Souvenirs of your visit can be bought from the shop and at the end of the day everyone can relax in the cafe, over tea and Welsh scones, to plan their next visit to Llyn Brenig.
NEW VISITOR CENTRE NOW OPEN 
Fishing Trips
Boat trips for parties and individuals.
Bait and fishing tackle can be hired.
For full details contact Rhos Point Sea Fishing Trips, Rhos Point.
Tel: Colwyn Bay 44829.
Holiday Activities
Not everyone wants to spend all the holiday lazing on the beach.
When you have tired of building sand castles and the donkeys are having a break, there are plenty of interesting places to visit in and around the town.
Welsh Mountain Zoo
Set in the scenic splendour of Flagstaff Gardens, the Welsh Mountain Zoo is one of Britain's finest Zoos, offering all the facilities needed for a complete day's family outing.
Overlooking Colwyn Bay and with magnificent panoramic views of Snowdonia, the Conwy Valley, Anglesey and the North Wales Coast, it provides the perfect setting for the varied collection of animals, birds and flowering plants.
Visit the new Jungle Adventure Land.
FREE minimus service from Easter to September from Colwyn Bay Station.
The Prince of Wales Theatre,
Open all year.
Annual Drama Festival in Early May.
Summer Show commences in June to September.
Various Productions throughout the year.
Contact the Box Office for details.
The Harlequin Marionette Theatre,
Britain's first ever permanent Puppet theatre, has been an established Colwyn Bay attraction for over 25 years.
It presents evening performances for adults and family shows in the afternoons from late June until early September.
This beautiful and unique theatre which won the Civic Trust Award for its design, is situated on the promenade, Rhos-on-Sea, Colwyn Bay.
Contacts:(0492 48166.
Promenade Bus
Introduced new for 1988 Summer season.
Promenade Run-about Bus service from Rhos-on-Sea to Old Colwyn.
Promenade Chalets
(Day Use Only)Have you thought about hiring a Promenade Chalet for a few days.
Fully equipped chalets are available for day or weekly hire.
Details of hire charge and availability from Colwyn Bay T.I.C.
Telephone 0492 530478
Colwyn & District Video Film
If you would like to view a videogram of Colwyn in the comfort of your own home for 7 days FREE LOAN, forward your cheque in the sum of £10 payable to Colwyn Borough Council with your Name, Address and Postcode to:.
(Your cheque will be returned to you on receipt of the video within 7 days).
Shopping in Colwyn
The new Colwyn Shopping Centre with bright, interesting shops and ample parking with direct access onto the shopping malls.
Also the new pedestrianised shopping areas in Colwyn Bay Town Centre.
Activity/Coach Tour Holidays
Your complete holiday at Colwyn Bay arranged for you with Bed, Breakfast and Evening Meal accommodation at your choice of Hotel inclusive of your choice of activity — Golfing, Bowling, Coach Tours, Fishing, Pony Trekking, Sailing.
Prices start at £55.
Send for Full Colour brochure and Booking for to .
Coach Tours
Explore North Wales's beauty spots and see the splendour of Snowdonia, magnificent Castles, lakes, Slate quarries and Welsh Woollen Mills, to name but a few of the Full-Day and Half-Day Coach Tours available.
bookings can be made at any one of our T.I.C.s.
National Express Travel Bookings
National Express Travel is bookable at Princes Drive Coach Park T.I.C.
during summer season and at the Town Centre T.I.C.
for the rest of the year.
Colwyn Leisure Centre,
Eirias Park, Colwyn Bay
Where you can make the most of your leisure time.
Open daily are:
Leisure Pool — Enjoy a swim in the relaxed family environment in sparkling clear water without the usual ‘swimming pool odours’.
This is the first pool in Wales with ozone water treatment plus the added attraction of a water chute.
Sports Hall ,
General Activities Room ,
Weight Training Room ,
Sauna ,
Solarium and Massage Suite — Sport activities include badminton, 5-a-side football, volleyball, basketball, tennis, cricket, archery, trampoline, squash.
Lounge Bar, Cafe — Concerts and  discos held regularly throughout the summer season.
For further information and booking contact Reception Telephone (0492) 533223.
Parks and Gardens
We are fortunate to be blessed in Colwyn Bay with a climate that favour cultivation of exotic and temperate plants, the like of which is unique to this climate.
The district has been national finalists in the Britain in Bloom contest in the last four years and this has been achieved by the magnificent floral displays which can be seen throughout the summer months in our area.
Eirias Park
Spend your leisure time in Eirias Park — the park by the sea.
Visit Dinosaur World, both educational and entertaining.
Enter one of our Bowling or Tennis Tournaments.
There are children's play areas — crazy golf — children's amusements — boating lake — model yacht pond — leisure centre, for that relaxed swim or indoor activity — Tennis Courts, open all year plus new indoor covered courts — Bowling Greens (2 Crown greens).
CHILDREN'S COMPETITIONS
are held at Eirias Park and Rhos-on-Sea paddling pool area during July and August.
Check the ‘What's On’ leaflet for details.
DINOSAUR WORLD.
Open daily Easter to September, 10am to dusk, weather permitting.
Life-size Dinosaurs.
Over 30 models in their natural habitat, new ones added every year.
Bring your lunch and spend the day — Picnic tables inside.
Educational for all the family.
Concessions for Schools and Parties.
New Tiny Tots Dinosaur Play Area.
MODEL YACHT POND.
New for 1988 season, a prestigious yachting pond has recently been constructed.
Sporting Facilities
Bowling
There are 9 Crown Greens in the Borough.
All of excellent standards.
Many competitions are arranged throughout the season.
For example Bowling Festival Week in Eirias Park usually held the first full week in August offer £2,000 in prize-money.
Well worth entering.
Crazy Golf
At Eirias Park and Rhos Point.
Squash Club
Colwyn Avenue, Rhos-on-Sea.
Open all year.
Visitors welcome.
Tel: 47046.
Cricket
For more relaxed entertainment, enjoy the sound of leather meeting willow at the Colwyn Bay Cricket club, Rhos-on-Sea or try the sports clubs at Mochdre and Abergele.
Golf
Colwyn Borough has three excellent golf courses.
Two 18-hole at Rhos-on-Sea and Abergele, and one 9-hole at Old Colwyn.
All welcome the tourist.
Riding
For those interested in more energetic pursuits, horse riding and pony trekking are available at Garthewin Farm, Llanfair T.H., Abergele and at Hwylfa Ddafydd, Llysfaen, Colwyn Bay.
Sailing, Water Skiing, Wind Surfing, Yachting
Off Cayley Promenade, Rhos-on-Sea.
Courses are available, wind surfing and boats for hire.
Tennis
At Eirias Park All-Weather surface Tennis Courts, plus new Indoor Courts (open all year).
Also courts at Rhos Park, Miny-Don Park, Pentre Mawr Park and Allanson Road, Rhos-on-Sea (private facilities).
Swimming
Swimming from Colwyn Bay's 3 miles of golden sand is safe and is ideal for families.
When Mum can relax in a deck chair and the children can enjoy making sand pipes and castles or having a donkey ride.
Not to mention the ice cream and snacks obtained from one of the many kiosks situated along the promenade.
Or enjoy a swim in the Leisure Centre situated in Eirias Park, in sparkling clear water without the usual swimming pool odours.
The pool with adjoining free form beach area caters for all age groups from the toddler to the senior citizen.
Pottering Around
One of the delights of being on holiday is not having to look at the clock.
There's time to stop off here and there and browse around the shops.
Hunting for presents to take home can sometimes be an unpleasant task, but Wales' store of distinctive crafts makes for plenty of choice.
A veritable emporium of crafts is found at Betws-y-Coed , and inland resort in the heart of Snowdonia.
You'll be hard pressed to choose from the array of goods displayed in the shops lining the main street.
If you would like to see how these goods are actually produced, then visit the Ruthin Craft Centre .
The purpose-built craft complex houses fourteen workshops where craftsmen work on a variety of fine crafts.
Wales is well known for its wool and woollen products.
Trefriw Woollen Mill on the B5106 between Conwy and Betws-y-Coed, produces beautiful bedspreads, rugs and tapestry.
Visitors can follow the various stages in processing the wool, from blending through cording, spinning and dyeing to wearing and garment manufacture.
There's a shop selling these products and a playground for the children.
Another mill is found at Penmachno , on the banks of the Machno river and waterfall.
The mill now weaves traditional tweeds.
A selection of crafts is available in the shop and there's also a cafe.
Fast disappearing are traditional flour mills.
At Felin Isaf , just outside Conwy is a unique water mill has been restored to its 1870 condition when operations were at their peak.
However, a large part of the machinery dated back to about 1730.
Flour is ground at the mill and can be bought form the mill shop.
HOTELS
COLWYN BAY/RHOS-ON-SEA
Anchor Hotel Comfortable Licensed Hotel close to Promenade and Town Centre.
Excellent home cooking with choice of menu.
All bedrooms have tea making facilities, some with shower/wc en-suite.
7 days for the price of 5 early and late season.
Large reductions for children.
Further details and colour brochure from Robert and Barbara Hackett.
Ashmount Hotel  Detached and beautifully situated on a quiet road off the promenade.
All 18 bedrooms have bathroom, TV, video channel, radio, telephone, tea making facilities.
Furnished to a very high standard, large elegant Restaurant with extensive menus.
The Hotel is ideally situated to explore North Wales.
AA ** RAC ** .
From £19.50 — Weekly from £149.
The Bell Hotel Small family-run Hotel with homely atmosphere where you are assured of the comfort and good food needed to make your holiday a memorable one.
Choice of meals.
Tea making facilities.
Special weekly low price from August Bank Holiday to Spring Bank Holiday inclusive.
For details contact Mick or Sue Wykes.
Colwyn Bay Activity and Coach Touring Holidays Half-board accommodation arranged at a choice of 8 Hotels, also self-catering accommodation available.
Choose from a 3-day Golfing Holiday to a 5- or 8-day Coach Touring Holiday.
Other activities to choose from include Drama Festival Weekends, Bowling, Pony Trekking, Sailing and Fishing.
Send for Full Colour Brochure and Booking Form.
Edelweiss Hotel 19th Century Country House set in own gardens and woodlands and tucked away in central Colwyn Bay.
All bedrooms en-suite with TV, video channel, clock/radio, telephone and kettle.
Games room, snooker, darts, etc.
Keep fit, sauna and solarium.
Pets welcome.
Private pathway leading to Promenade.
Eirias Park and Leisure Centre.
Haven Villa Private Hotel Small family-run hotel.
Home-cooked food, continental breakfast/English with menu.
TVs in bedrooms, intercom listening service, public pay phone.
Certificate Merit food/hygiene.
Central heating.
Winner Hotels in Bloom 87/88.
RAC listed.
WTB verified.
BB from £7.
BBEM from £10.
Sae further information please.
Hopeside Hotel Awaiting verification.
A privately-owned West End Hotel, extensively modernised giving a guarantee of individual attention to all our guests.
All bedrooms have private facilities with bath or showers, colour TV, radio, direct dial telephones, tea/coffee making facilities.
Lounge bar and restaurant offering a first-class menu.
Extremely attractive locality.
AA *** RAC *** 
Hotel 70° Modern 3-star Hotel in spectacular cliff-top location with panoramic views over the Bay of Colwyn.
Two bars and award-winning restaurant with dancing at weekends.
All bedrooms with direct dial telephone, radio, colour satellite TV, tea and coffee making facilities, trouser press and hairdryer.
Special golfing and Getaway Breaks available.
Open all year round.
Lyndale Hotel & Restaurant A highly recommended luxurious 2-star Hotel overlooking the beautiful bay of Colwyn.
The splendid restaurant offers and extensive choice of menu both traditional and speciality.
Modern bedrooms, all with bathrooms en-suite, colour televisions, telephones, radio intercom, teamaker and baby listening units.
Private car park.
Limited free accommodation for children.
Marine Hotel Superbly situated AA * RAC seafront Hotel offering spacious, comfortable accommodation.
Most rooms with shower and toilet, many with sea view.
Tea-making in all rooms.
Laundry facilities, colour TV lounge, ample parking on premises.
Children of all ages most welcome.
Short breaks and weekend bookings welcome.
Northwood Hotel Detached family hotel 175 yards Rhos Village and Promenade.
Highly rated for good food with wide choice of menu.
Thirteen bedrooms (10 en-suite) all with colour television, clock/radios, tea/coffee making facilities, Lounge.
Lounge Bar.
Parking.
Special rates for children.
Mini-breaks early/late season.
Special Christmas Programme.
Special promotional holidays for golf, fishing, Cadw, drama festival, etc.
Brochure on request.
RHOS ABBEY HOTEL This spacious 3-star Hotel with its unrivalled position on the Promenade overlooking the Bay of Colwyn.
Licensed bars, in-house entertainment Sunday and Tuesday each week.
Freedom breaks all year.
RAC *** .
All bedrooms have private bathrooms, colour TV, radio and telephone and tea and coffee making facilities.
St Enoch's Hotel St Enoch's Hotel, West Promenade, Colwyn Bay, AA ** RAC ** .
Fully licensed: Bar meals available.
This spacious Hotel is situated in one of the finest positions on the seafront in the centre of the Bay and has every amenity including Residents' Lounge and Dining Rooms overlooking the sea.
Many rooms en-suite.
Ample parking space.
Children are welcome.
Sunny Downs Hotel Sunny Downs is renowned for its comfort, cleanliness and cuisine.
Single, double and family rooms, some with private facilities are available.
The hotel is centrally heated throughout and has a fully licensed restaurant and separate bar.
TV lounge, car park and the beach is just a 3-minute level walk away.
Westwood Hotel (Coed Gorllewin)Friendly atmosphere: owners' personal attention.
Varied menus, including children's and chef's specials.
Licensed; car park; central heating.
All bedrooms have: ‘H & c ’; shaver points; tea/coffee facilities; colour TVs.
OPEN ALL YEAR.
Specialists in out-of-season breaks, e.g. ‘WELSH WEEKENDS’ and our NEW YEAR SPECIAL.
Special rates for children and senior citizens.
SELF-CATERING
Hwylfa Ddafydd Country Farm Holidays Enjoy a stay in one of the luxury self-catering cottages at this new complex with restaurant and chambermaid facilities situated only 3 miles from Colwyn Bay.
The Cottages accommodate up to 6 people and are all equipped to a very high standard.
Colour TV, heating, electricity, linen, etc.
Accommodation available for disabled persons.
Pony Trekking facilities.
Fir Tree Cottage/Willow Cottage Two delightful cottages, superbly situated only 30 yards to sea front, and 2 minutes walk to Rhos-on-Sea golf Club, Colour TV, automatic washer, fitted kitchen, 3 bedrooms, conservatory, patio.
Lovely walled garden giving complete privacy, barbecue etc.
Please send SAE to S. Broomhead at above address for coloured brochure.
Nant-y-Glyn Leisure Holiday cottages & chalets set in a lovely sheltered valley.
Just a few minutes walk from town centre & beach.
Ideal base for seeing North Wales.
For coloured brochure send SAE to J. Macey.
Address as above.
How to get there
BY RAIL
Regular fast trains run from London Euston, Coventry, Birmingham New Street, and Manchester Victoria.
Journey times are as follows: London less than 4 hours, Birmingham 2½ hours, Manchester 2 hours.
Through trains now run from Yorkshire in High Season.
Call at your local Station or British Rail appointed Travel Agent.
Colwyn Bay also operate their own inclusive package holiday.
See inside this brochure for further details.
BY CAR
The new Expressway gives easier access from the main motorway network and brings you into the Town Centre of Colwyn Bay.
The resort is now only ¾ hour travelling distance from the M56 Motorway which links with the M6, leading either south to Birmingham and London and the south-west or North to Glasgow and Edinburgh.
The M56 and A56 provide a direct link with the A55, from Manchester.
Travelling time from London is approximately 4 hours, Birmingham 2½ and Manchester 1½ hours.
BY COACH
COLWYN BAY can be reached either directly or by connecting coach services from all parts of the Country and there are express services from all major cities.
Details from Information Centre or your local Tour Operator.
Colwyn Bay has a new purpose built Coach Station in Princes Drive.
BY AIR
International and internal flights arrive at both Manchester and Liverpool Airports, which are approximately 1 hour travelling distance by road from Colwyn Bay.
There are also good coach and rail connections between the resort and these major points of entry.
CENTRE FOR ALTERNATIVE TECHNOLOGY
A WORLD OF GREEN LIVING
SPEND ANYTHING FROM ONE HOUR TO ALL DAY EXPLORING THE AMAZING WORLD OF GREEN LIVING AT THE CENTRE FOR ALTERNATIVE TECHNOLOGY ALL KINDS OF FASCINATING EXHIBITS AND ENVIRONMENT-FRIENDLY BUILDINGS
Delicious wholefood snacks and meals available in our Egon Ronay recommended vegetarian restaurant.
Gifts, ‘Green’ products for the home, and a wide range of books on sale at the Centre's shop.
There's also an adventure playground, a toddlers play area and an unusual maze where you can test your own ecological skills.
WIND TURBINES
WATER POWER
SOLAR ENERGY
ACRES OF ORGANIC DISPLAY GARDENS
ENERGY CONSERVATIONS
LOW ENERGY DWELLINGS
BRITAIN'S BEST INSULATED HOUSE
CENTRE FOR ALTERNATIVE TECHNOLOGY
DISCOVER A SUSTAINABLE FUTURE IN THE BEAUTIFUL HILLS OF WALES
A great day out for all the family, the Centre for Alternative Technology is a living and working community which has been promoting and displaying sustainable technologies for more than 16 years.
Since the Centre abounds in wildlife, the only dogs allowed beyond the car park are guide dogs.
We are easy to find, just 2½ miles north of Machynlleth on the A487.
Parking is free and coaches very welcome (coaches should approach from the south).
Regular buses and trains connect Machynlleth with the rest of Wales and England.
Full restaurant service available from Easter to end of October — or by prior arrangement.
When the unique water balanced cliff railway opens — Summer 1991 — prices may be adjusted.
NATIONAL MUSEUM OF WALES
Cathays Park, Cardiff
National Museum of Wales in Cardiff's City Centre
Treasure House of the Nation
the story of Wales from earliest times
Masterpieces of Welsh fine and applied art are displayed alongside European works of great distinction
Renoir's La Parisienne, ‘The Blue Lady’ is one of a series of masterpieces by the French Impressionists and Post-Impressionists bequeathed by the sisters Gwendoline and Margaret Davies, grand-daughters of a Welsh coal magnate
Fine Swansea and Nantgarw porcelains are an important part of the large collection of ceramics
Wales is renowned for its rich and diverse plant life that grows on mountains and moorlands, in secluded valleys and on the rugged coastline.
Many of these ranging from simple algae to complex flowering plants are displayed
The Snowdon Lily from Snowdonia is one of a number of rare plants that grow in Wales
A Cuckoo Pint is one of many poisonous plants from Wales, some of which have medicinal uses
The animal life in Wales including mammals, birds and fish, is exhibited in presenting the whole animal kingdom.
Conservation of animals alongside the factors that cause a decline in animal populations are highlighted
Many extinct species of animals, Beaver, Lynx and European Bison are on display
The Red Kite is one of the rare bird species protected in rural Wales
The display of shells and butterflies from Wales and the rest of the world is complimented by a children's Quiz
The wide range of exciting archaeological discoveries in Wales includes 250,000 year old human remains, prehistoric finds, Celtic and Roman objects, and finds illustrating life in Medieval Wales.
The Early Christian Monuments, Bronze Age goldwork and crafts of the Iron Age blacksmith form spectacular displays.
The very large collections of rocks, minerals and fossils from many parts of the world demonstrate the succession of changes that have taken place throughout the Earth over the vast span of geological time.
Although spectacular fossils such as dinosaurs are not preserved in Wales, specimens from other regions help to emphasize the rich diversity of life that existed elsewhere in the distant past
Edmontosaurus The skeleton of a 70 million year old plant-eating dinosaur (9 metres long) from South Dakota, USA
HOW TO FIND US
The National Museum of Wales main building is situated in Cathays Park in Cardiff's beautiful civic centre
PLANNING YOUR VISIT
On and off street parking is available within easy walking distance of the museum and coach parties can be dropped off at the main entrance
There is a restaurant and also a museum book/gift shop
Facilities for the disabled include a lift, toilets and loan of invalid chairs
There is a programme of Temporary Exhibitions throughout the year.
Further information on these exhibitions can be obtained from the Department of Public Services  
Vale of Neath
A beautiful place to visit
Croeso i Castell Nedd: Welcome to Neath
Come and sample the beauty of the Vale of Neath from spectacular waterfalls in the north to the quiet simplicity of Neath Abbey in the south.
There is something for all the family at the five major attractions in the Vale — Penscynor Wildlife Park, Aberdulais Falls and Basin, Cefn Coed Colliery Museum, Gunsmoke Cowboy Town and Heath Canal Basin.
For almost 300 years the Value of Neath has had many famous visitors including the artist J.H.M. Turner, whose painting ‘Aberdulais Mill’ is well known.
At the end of your visit I'm sure you'll agree the Vale of Neath is a beautiful place 
Neath Town and Market
Neath boasts a fully pedestrianised town centre with ample surface car parking and a variety of shops.
A Victorian covered market has fresh produce and Welsh fare such as laverbread, faggots and peas.
Neath Castle, built in 1284, overlooks the town and is presented being restored.
Victoria Gardens — traditional Victorian style gardens provide a haven for tired shoppers.
Behind the main shopping centre is Church place, a Conservation Area housing Neath Borough Museum in the Old Mechanics Institute, a restored Grade II Listed Building.
Neath Abbey
Walk in the footsteps of ancient monks and taste the haunting atmosphere of Neath Abbey.
Built in 1130, this Cistercian Abbey was described as the ‘Fairest Abbey in all Wales’ by Tudor historian John Leland.
Although situated near an industrial area, its location on the banks of the Tennant Canal makes it a tranquil and memorable site.
Neath Canal
Glide down the four miles of restored canal in the twelve seater passenger boat ‘Thomas Dadford’.
Trips, available at weekends in the Summer and daily during school summer holidays, from Rheola or Resolven (A465).
‘Enfys’, a purpose built boat for disabled people is available for hire throughout the year.
An 18th Century canal Lengthsman's cottage, Ty Banc, Resolven, has been restored by Neath Borough Council and is now operated by West Glamorgan Association for the Disabled as a team room and gift shop.
Walk along the landscaped towpath to see the seven locks, two aqueducts, four bridges and canal basins at Aberdulais and Resolven.
Aberdulais Basin, the meeting point of the Neath and Tennant Canals, has a restored skew bridge and a ten arched aqueduct.
Vale of Neath Country Parks
Gnoll Park — A designated Historical Landscape Garden dating from the 17th Century with a reservoir, cascades, lakes and playgrounds, together with many other landscape features.
Access from either the B4287 Neath/Pontrhydyfen or B4434 Neath/Tonna.
Craig Gwladys — Next to Penscynor Wildlife Park, this area of woodland has waymarked footpaths and picnic areas with spectacular views of the Dulais an Neath Valleys.
Pant y Sais Fen — A site of special scientific interest and a designated Nature Reserve at Jersey Marine — boardwalks give access to fenland and canal.
Aberdulais Basin — see page 6.
Eaglesbush Valley — a tranquil woodland walk within the densely populated area of Melincrythan.
Penscynor Wildlife Park
Come and see the 100 species of monkey who live in the park's 17 acres and don't miss the colourful flamingoes, the  chimpanzees' tea party, the playful penguins or feeding time for the sea-lines.
Add to this a chair lift to the top of the Alpine Slide and you have a day out for all the family.
Over 300,000 visitors a year enjoy the waterfalls, flower gardens, exotic birds, animal life and the children's playground.
The ‘Copper Kettle’ coffee shop, souvenir shop and burger restaurant are available to provide refreshments.
Schools make regular visits to study the park's wildlife.
Contact the Education Officer for further details.
Aberdulais Falls
For over 300 years this famous and powerful waterfall has provided the energy to drive the wheels of industry.
Nestling among the site's historic remains, a unique hydro-electric scheme has been developed to harness this great natural resource.
The Turbine House provides a new visitor access including view of the turbine, power equipment, fish pass and displays.
Nearby a huge waterwheel has been developed to generate power for a special lift for less able visitors, providing access to the top of the falls.
Situate in his historic village of Aberdulais, Aberdulais Falls is an ideal starting place for exploring the Vale of Neath.
National Trust Gift Shop, educational facilities, light refreshments and guided tours are available in the Summer.
Cefn Coed Colliery Museum
Cefn Coed Colliery Museum, near Crynant in the Dulais Valley, is a must for anyone interested in mining and the social history of the Valleys.
Walk into a simulated drift mine, marvel at the huge steam winding engine and boilers and examine the photographs and mining memorabilia of the Dulais Valley.
Take home a miniature mining lamp or other souvenirs for sale in the shop.
Open all the year, except Christmas and New Year's Day, with a tea-room available in the peak summer season.
Group visits may book guided tours.
Gunsmoke Town
Ride into Gunsmoke Cowboy Town at Seven Sisters in the Dulais Valley.
A miniature cowboy town with a Fort Apache, Saloon and Jailhouse will delight the children.
A ‘train ride’ takes you right into town where all the action is.
Remember to come dressed to kill for a part in the ‘Shoot Outs’ held regularly in the Summer.
You can also see a working sawmill and collection of miners' lamps.
With free car parks, picnic areas and refreshments available this will be a visit to the Wild West you'll never forget.
Waterfalls
The Value of Neath is renowned for the number and variety of waterfalls.
Melin Cwrt Falls, south of Resolven, is a nature reserve owned by Glamorgan Wildlife Trust.
Aberdulais Falls, Aberdulais, owned by the National Trust — see page 6.
Pontneddfechan — visit the award winning Tourist Information Centre in the centre of the village for maps and advice on footpaths to nine major waterfalls, ruins of a Gunpowder Works and Silica Mine.
A Waterfalls Walks Guide Book is available from the T.I.C.
Remember to wear walking shoes, and to stay on the marked footpaths as accidents have occurred.
Accommodation
All the accommodation in this leaflet is WTB verified at the time of going to press (January 1990).
Please contact each hotel/guest house for details of price/availability.
HOTELS
Castle Hotel, Neath
Beds 28.
An historic 17th Century Coaching Inn and birthplace of Welsh Rugby Union in 1991. 28 en suite bedrooms, all with colour TV, telephone, radio, trouser press, hairdryer, tea and coffee making facilities.
The hotel has sauna, solarium and fitness equipment.
Restaurant open to non-residents.
Conference and special weekend breaks available.
Europa Hotel, Neath
Beds 12.
A small family run hotel in a Conservation Area.
All rooms have colour TV, tea and coffee making facilities.
English breakfast provided and home cooked evening meals available by arrangement.
There are comfortable TV and Bar Lounges.
Melyn Manor Motel
Beds 20.
Bed and breakfast, lunch and evening meal.
All rooms en suite with colour TV, coffee/tea making facilities, children's playground.
Adjacent to pub which offers free nightly entertainment for guests.
Oaktree Parc Hotel and Restaurant, Skewen
Beds 10.
Refurbished Gentlemen's country residence retaining  its charm and family atmosphere.
All rooms en-suite with colour TV, telephone, hair dryer, wall safe and tea/coffee making facilities.
A la Carte restaurant for lunches and dinners.
Invalid access to the restaurant.
Tower Hotel
14 bedrooms with colour TV, tea/coffee making facilities.
Restaurant, bar meals and outdoor swimming pool.
The tower itself is a local landmark and was once a ‘camera obscura’.
Golf course and pony trekking centre opposite.
GUEST HOUSES
Conway Guest House
Beds 5.
A family run guest house situated in a Conservation Area in the centre of Neath.
TV tea/coffee making facilities in all rooms.
Bed and breakfast with evening meals available upon request.
Cwmbach Cottage (Listed)
Beds 5 double — 1 room suitable disabled visitors.
Bed and breakfast with evening meals available on request.
3 rooms with ensuite facilities.
Central heating, tea/coffee making facilities and TV available on request.
Adjacent to Neath Golf Club.
Dyffryn Guest House, Glynneath (Listed)
Beds 4.
Tea/coffee making facilities, central heating, TV lounge.
Car park at rear.
Near to the ‘waterfalls country’.
3 Main Road, Cadoxton, Neath (Listed)
Beds 3, 3 Welsh cottages converted into a family run Guest House.
Colour TV, tea/coffee making facilities and guest sitting room.
Convenient for Neath, Penscynor and Aberdulais Falls.
Slebech Cottage, Bryncoch (Listed)
A charming country cottage with bed and breakfast — evening meals on request.
Guest sitting room with colour TV, tea/coffee making facilities in all rooms.
Country pub next door.
Tree Tops Guest House, Briton Ferry (Listed
Beds 5.
Family run Guest House with full central heating.
Guest lounge with colour TV.
Home cooked evening meals and cream teas.
Victoria Guest House, Neath
Beds 5.
A family run Guest House situated in a Conservation Area near the centre of Neath.
Central heating, colour TV, coffee/tea making facilities in all rooms.
FARM ACCOMMODATION
Gelli Farm, Crynant, Neath
Beds 3.
A 15th Century Manor House set in 580 acres.
Offers ensuite and family rooms with colour TV and some overlooking rose garden and lily pond.
The adjacent Gelli Farm Restaurant offers a high cuisine with local produce and home cooking.
Ynys Gambwll Farm, Pontneddfechan, Neath
Beds 2.
Two double bedrooms, bed and breakfast, central heating.
Near waterfall walks, Welsh spoken .
SELF CATERING
5 High Street, Pontneddfechan  (Listed)
Beds 2.
Two country cottages converted to supply one double and one double plus one single bedded rooms.
Full central heating, TV and car parking.
Across the road from the White Horse Inn — a family run pub serving lunches and evening meals.
Convenient for waterfall walks.
HOSTEL ACCOMMODATION
Pelenna Forest International Mountain Centre.
Beds 26.
Car parking, central heating, colour TV.
Licensed bar, restaurant and café.
Conference facilities for 60 persons.
Young people catered for.
Five star rating Outward Bound centre — canoeing, caving, rock climbing pony trekking etc.
Management training courses, English language courses for students .
Activities
Rugby:Wales' national game played in every community from September to April.
For details of Neath's (All Blacks) fixtures tel: 0639 636547.
Cricket:Glamorgan C.C.C.
play at The Gnoll ground in the centre of Neath.
For a list of fixtures contact Neath Cricket Club tel: 0639 643719.
Swimming and Sports Centres:
1.
Dyfed Road, Neath.
A swimming pool and toddlers pool, squash courts, health suite and multi-gym.
Open daily all year.
Tel: 0639 642827.
2.
Glynneath Swimming Pool, multi-gym and canoe training.
Tel: 0639 720460 for details of opening times.
3.
Llangatwg School Swimming Pool.
Open some evenings and school holidays.
Tel: 0639 641121.
4.
Cwrt Herbert Playing Fields.
5.
Hengwrt Sports Hall, Briton Ferry — most indoor sporting pursuits catered for.
Bowls:5 Greens available at various locations in the Borough.
Tennis:6 courts available at Dyfed Road, Neath 3 courts available at Jersey Park, Briton Ferry.
Walking:The Value of Neath abounds with opportunities for walking.
Here are a few:
Pant y Sais Fen, Melin Cwrt Falls, Neath and Tennant Canals, Coed Morgannwg Way, Sarn Helen, Eaglesbush Valley, Longford Dingle, Shelone Woods, Waterfall Walks and Forestry Commission Walks.
Pelenna Mountain Centre:Situated in the hills above Tonmawr, this outdoor pursuits centre offers a range of residential courses throughout the year.
Sailing — Monkstone Marina on the River Neath at Briton Ferry has a clubhouse and berths available for hire 
Pony Trekking — available along the Jersey Marine shoreline.
Contact Pant y Sais Riding Centre, Jersey Marine.
Also at Moss House Reservoir — contact Bryon Jones, Wenallt Farm, Tonna.
Fishing — Game fishing is available in Neath and Dulais Rivers, also fishing is available in the Neath and Tennant Canals and Gnoll grounds.
Golf — Choose from 5 courses:—
1.
Swansea Bay Golf Course and 18 hole course at Jersey Marine overlooking Swansea Bay.
2.
Neath Golf Course , an 18 hole, one of the highest in Wales with views of seven counties.
3.
Glynneath Golf Club , a 16 hole course at Pontneddfechan in the foothills of the Brecon Beacons.
4.
Glynclydach House Hotel , Neath has a 9 hole pitch and putt course.
5.
Gnoll Park has a 9 hole pitch and putt course available for public use.
Concerts:The Gwyn Hall, Neath, has a varied programme of concerts throughout the year.
How to get there.
It's easy to arrive in Neath.
Out and About
Why not make Neath your centre for touring South Wales?
Within half an hour from Neath you can visit:
Dan-yr Ogof Show Caves — a complex of caves with stalagmites and stalactites; dinosaur park, dry ski slope.
Margam Park — 850 acres of parkland with a fairytale model village, maze, adventure playground, orangery.
Afan Argoed Country Park — picnic sites, footpaths, cycle hire, Miners' Museum 
Swansea City — Leisure centre, marina, maritime museum, plantasia tropical plant house.
Gower Peninsula — a Designated Area of Outstanding Beauty with beautiful beaches.
The Valleys — sample South Wales' rich historical past and countryside.
St. Fagans Welsh Folk Museum — reconstructed farmhouses, school, chapel, village shops in the grounds of a manor house.
Brecon Beacons National Park — an area of mountainous scenery and natural beauty.
YNYS HYWEL
A CENTRE FOR THE COUNTRYSIDE IN THE BEAUTIFUL VALLEYS OF WALES
THE OLD WELSH FARMHOUSE
Ynys Hywel Countryside Centre is set in the heart of 1000 acre Sirhowy Valley Country Park — a perfect setting and a unique venue.
An 18th century Welsh longhouse has been carefully extended to offer comfortable ‘three crown’ residential accommodation and a modern versatile training centre.
There is a small lounge bar, and the restaurant, traditionally furnished in country pine, follows a healthy living theme with its range of delicious freshly prepared meals.
Try our Welsh cooking — you won't regret it!
THE FARM ON THE HILL
The restoration of the farm encapsulates the reclamation of South Wales Valleys.
Welsh Black cattle and sheep now graze where bracken covered the mountain.
Field boundaries are set according to the tithe map of 1846, with the old methods of dry stone walling and laid hedges.
There is an organic garden and tree nursery, which along with the farm, are valuable areas both for schoolchildren and adults.
Our ancient woodland, Craig Gock, with impressive oak and beech, is rich in wildlife and from the commons above there are panoramic views which unveil the true beauty of the area.
FLEXIBLE FACILITIES
Just a short journey from the busy M4 and major cities, Ynys Hywel provides a perfect location for business meetings and seminars in the peace and tranquillity of the countryside.
Here you can forget crowded car parks, traffic jams and distracting street noises and focus your attention on the business in hand.
Our staff are always available to make your stay as trouble free as possible.
WELSH BLACK CATTLE
TRADITIONAL DRY STONE WALLING
YNYS HYWEL COUNTRYSIDE CENTRE
The Ynys Hywel Trail takes about an hour.
RESIDENTIAL COURSES
We have developed a range of short courses related to health, lifestyle and the environment making extensive use of the farm, woodland and Country Park.
If you are a beginner or enthusiast, you will find that our tutors are specialists in their field and that learning can be fun!
You can also organise your own courses at Ynys Hywel with the advice and assistance of our qualified staff.
FOR THE CASUAL VISITOR
Every weekend during the summer from 2 to 5pm you can call into the Centre for afternoon tea and Welsh cakes, and perhaps buy a souvenir.
There is a display on the agricultural history of Ynys Hywel and information on the special events and courses planned for the year.
Bed and Breakfast accommodation is available on a pre-booked basis, and of course the Centre is an ideal venue for special parties, family reunions, weddings and other special occasions.
EVENTS
Look out for a host of special events — themed evening meals with entertainment, activities for children, guided walks and landrover safaris…
CAMPING BARN
Traditionally an overnight shelter, our camping barn with log fire and views of the valley is popular with walker and a wide range of groups and clubs.
Bring your sleeping bag but leave your tent behind.
HOW TO FIND US
Ynys Hywel is accessible by car with ample parking.
We are half an hour from Cardiff and two and a half hours from London along the M4.
The nearest railway station is at Newport where there is a regular bus service to Cwmfelinfach.
There is a separate access for large vehicles and coaches.
Advance arrangements should be made with the Manager before arrival.
YNYS HYWEL FARM CIRCA 1900
BIG PIT
UNIQUE UNDERGROUND TOUR OF A COALMINE
BLAENAFON, SOUTH WALES
A UNIQUE UNDERGROUND TOUR THROUGH 19TH.
CENTURY COAL AND IRONSTONE WORKINGS
Big Pit closed as a working colliery in 1980, exactly 100 years after it first produced coal.
In Blaenafon the mining of coal and ironstone on a large scale began in the 1780s and some of these older workings are connected with Big Pit.
The pit is now a museum where visitors can go underground and discover how miners have worked and lived over the last 200 years.
The photographs show you something of what you will see — underground roadways, coal-faces, haulage engines, and on the surface the blacksmiths' shop, the baths, and exhibitions.
THE UNDERGROUND TOUR
First you will be kitted out with a safety helmet, cap lamp and ‘self-rescuer’ just like a working miner.
Then you will ride down in the cage to the bottom of the shaft — 294 feet deep.
Ex-miners will be your guides and their explanations and anecdotes will bering your trip to life.
The underground tour lasts nearly an hour.
During this time you will walk through workings some of which are over a hundred years old.
There are many fascinating relics of mining history preserved here, including stables and haulage engines.
At the coalface your guides will explain the different methods of extracting coal and the working conditions of the miners.
Although the Big Pit no longer produces coal it is still a real mine, so please remember to wear practical shoes and warm clothing.
Layout of Underground Workings
SOME OF THE FEATURES AT BIG PIT, BLAENAFON
A unique underground tour, with an ex-miner as your guide.
The original colliery buildings, including the winding engine-house, the blacksmiths' shop and pithead baths.
Exhibitions illustrating the history of the South Wales coal industry and the way of life of the mining communities.
The miners' canteen, now offering a range of hot and cold snacks and meals, confectionery and ice cream.
A gift shop well stocked with souvenirs and publications
A professional photographer to record your visit.
Ample free parking space; and a picnic area.
HOW TO GET THERE
Big Pit within easy reach for a day trip to anyone in South or Mid Wales, the West of England, the Midlands, or even London.
From the M4, turn off at junction 26 and take the A4042 to Pontypool, then the A4043 to Blaenafon.
From the A465 Heads of the Valleys Road turn off at Brynmawr and take the B4248 for Blaenafon.
From the M50 take the A449 to Raglan, then the A40 to Abergavenny, and the B4246 to Blaenafon.
Big Pit is about a male out of Blaenafon on the B4248, and is well signposted.
Big Pit is Open Daily from March to November
At other times ring fro details.
The first underground tour starts at 10.00a.m.; the last underground tour starts at 3.30p.m.
Parties please book in advance.
Disabled visitors please ‘phone in advance to discuss arrangements.
We regret that children under 5 years of age cannot be taken underground.
Welsh Industrial and Maritime Museum
Bute Street, Cardiff
NATIONAL MUSEUM OF WALES
Welsh Industrial and Maritime Museum presenting the industrial and maritime heritage of Wales
The story of how industry, road, rail and sea transport evolved in and around Wales is told in a variety of exhibitions.
The museum is located in the heart of Cardiff Bay, an area which is about to embark on a most exciting development on an international scale
THE HALL OF POWER
The various types of engines which allowed heavy industries in Wales to develop are on display.
Starting with the waterwheel, the story moves on to the beam engine and other types of steam engines such as a huge colliery fan engine, and gas turbines — all in working order.
Many can be seen in operation daily
OUTSIDE EXHIBITS
A very wide collection of exhibits, ranging from a lifeboat (‘Watkin Williams’), a sailing pilot cutter (‘Kindly Light’), a steam tugboat (‘Sea Alarm’), various railway vehicles, cranes, an air-sea rescue helicopter and the small boat collection, are on display.
Of unique importance in the history of transport is a full-scale, working, live steam replica of Trevithick's Penydarren locomotive of 1804 — the world's first railway locomotive.
ROAD TRANSPORT GALLERY
The collection of road vehicles, spanning over a century, includes a horse-drawn tram and horse buses, other horse-drawn vehicles and a ‘penny-farthing’ bicycle.
Powered transport is represented by the earliest surviving British-built motor car, early motor cycles, a steam roller, a traction engine and various buses.
Present-day developments are represented by a Sinclair C5 and a solar-powered car
‘Q-SHED’:
‘Q-shed’ was once the warehouse and booking office for the much-loved P. & A. Campbell pleasure steamers ,Today, a wide range of exciting and dynamic events and activities frequently changed are held here.
These will appeal to all ages but in particular to younger visitors.
HOW TO FIND US
The Welsh Industrial and Maritime Museum is 2 miles from Cardiff's City Centre in Cardiff Bay which is fast becoming one of the most exciting areas of Cardiff.
PLANNING YOUR VISIT
Ample free parking is available adjacent to the Museum and coach parties can be dropped off at the main entrance
There is a Museum Book/Gift shop
There is a frequent No. 7 ‘Clipper’ Bus service from Queen Street (Churchill Way) via Bute Street to the Museum.
Shuttle trains run from Cardiff Queen Street Station to Bute Road at regular intervals
Facilities for the disabled include a lift, toilets, loan of invalid chairs and access to all areas of the Museum
There is an extensive programme of Temporary Exhibitions and Special Events throughout the year.
Further information is available from the Keeper's Office
You can also include the Hands-on-Science Centre Techniquest which is opposite the Museum and take advantage of the reduced rate joint admission tickets.
THE RAILWAY GALLERY
the 150 year-old former Bute Road Station Building, once the Head Office of the Taff Vale Railway, is now the Railway Gallery.
The fascinating story of the complex railway history of Wales is told through superb visual displays, and an impressive collection of models of locomotives of the Welsh railway companies and a magnificent model of the Taff Vale's Locomotive Works.
Adjoining the Railway Gallery is the Wales Railway Centre where, amongst other activities, a collection of ten G.W.R., L.M.S.
and British Rail steam locomotives is being restored.
BUTETOWN WALKABOUT
Complete your visit with a leisurely stroll around Cardiff Bay with a lavishly illustrated broadsheet to guide you around the remarkable historic buildings and structures which are part of this fascinating environment.
STEAM DAYS AND SPECIAL EVENTS
Steam days are held on the first Saturday of each month from April to October when as many as possible of the exhibits are operated and many additional attractions are provided.
Special children's activities are also available during some holiday periods.
126 BUTE STREET
Joseph Frazer's noted Ship Chandlery, one of many such businesses once so common in Butetown, has been adapted to house an exhibition which tells the fascinating story of the Port of Cardiff and the people who came here from all over the world to create a remarkable cosmopolitan community.
The story of the rise and fall of this great coal port and of the fortunes of the people who lived and worked here is told through a dramatic interpretation set in a simulated dockland environment.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES
School visits can be both rewarding and enjoyable.
Resource materials are provided including activity sheets and workpacks.
A visit is particularly relevant to the new National Curricula in History, Science and Technology.
The East Wing Art Galleries at the NATIONAL MUSEUM OF WALES
Cathays Park, Cardiff
The re-opening of eight of the National Museum of Wales's art galleries in 1990 marked the completion of the first phase of the £24 million development programme currently under way.
Two further galleries were added in 1991.
In 1993, six new galleries in the centre block will be open for the display of nineteenth century French art (some already shown) and our growing collection of contemporary art.
In addition there will be substantial extra space for other departments of the Museum, and improved visitor facilities.
In re-planning the east wing galleries, built in 1928–32, great efforts have been made to respect their dignified classical architecture.
Air-conditioning, which cleans the air and controls the level of humidity — both essential for the conservation of oil paintings — has been installed.
The lighting of the galleries has also been transformed and computer controlled blinds fitted to prevent damage from excessive levels of daylight.
The Museum houses the Welsh national art collection and the principal theme of these galleries is the work of Welsh artists in their British and European context, and the history of the Fine and Applied Arts in Wales from the Middle Ages to the 20th century.
FRENCH AND ITALIAN ART, 17TH CENTURY
The classical landscape, the supreme achievement of painters in 17th century Rome is represented by Nicolas Poussin, Claude Lorrain and Gaspard Dughet.
All were to have a profound influence on British landscape painting.
Nicolas Poussin —Landscape with the body of Phocion being carried out of Athens 
BRITISH PORTRAITS AND NORTHERN EUROPEAN ART, 16TH and 17TH CENTURIES
Welsh portraits are displayed opposite the art of Holland and Flanders.
Other highlights are the ewer and basin made in Bruges for Thomas Mostyn and the Tudor and Stuart silver on loan from Welsh churches.
RUBENS TAPESTRY CARTOONS
Controversy over their authorship has obscured the quality of these rare tapestry cartoons.
The bold and heroic treatment of the early history of Rome typifies the ambition and classicism of 17th century Flemish art.
Portrait miniatures and Continental applied art of the period also exhibited here.
BRITISH AND ITALIAN ART, 18TH CENTURY
The 18th century was a golden age in Wales both for patrons and artists.
The taste, wealth and power of Sir Watkin Williams Wynn is represented by his Batoni portrait and by furniture and silver designed by Robert Adam.
Richard Wilson, the genius of landscape painting, has a place of honour.
The sparkling townscapes of Naples by his pupil Thomas Jones herald the discovery of nature in the 19th century.
ART IN WALES
late 18TH and early 19TH CENTURIES
In the decades following the death of Richard Wilson in 1782, the beauties of the Principality were re-discovered by a new generation of artists including J. Inigo Richards, Anthony Devis, J. C. Ibbetson, Copley Fielding, William Daniell and David Cox.
These Picturesque and Romantic views of Wales are hung beside portraits of leading Welshmen of the period, including General Picton by Sir Martin Archer Shee and Thomas Williams, ‘The Copper King’ by Sir Thomas Lawrence.
BRITISH AND CONTINENTAL ART, 1800–1850
During the first half of the nineteenth century J.M.W. Turner and John Constable took British landscape painting to the forefront of the Romantic movement.
At the same time, Rome remained the international capital of neo-classicism for French painters such as François Granet and Englishmen such as J. Scarlett Davies.
Their contemporaries in Rome included the sculptor John Gibson and the painter Penry Williams, the two most distinguished Welsh artists of the nineteenth century.
Also shown here is applied art of the first half of the 19th century, including Swansea and Nantgarw porcelain.
BRITISH ART, 1850–1940
The range of Victorian and Edwardian painting can be seen in the variety of subjects from classical, medieval and modern life and contrasting styles from the minute detail of the Pre-Raphaelites to the broad brush of Sickert and Steer.
The exuberance of Augustus John balances the exquisite calm of his sister Gwen, now recognised as one of the great British painters of this century.
BRITISH ART AFTER 1940
From its foundation, the National Museum has collected contemporary painting and sculpture.
When the galleries in the Courtyard development are completed a systematic display of modern art will be possible.
Shown here is a very small selection which will change from time to time.
PRINT ROOM
Changing displays from the Museum's collection of 20,000 watercolours, prints and drawings and elsewhere.
MEDIEVAL AND RENAISSANCE ART
The 13th century Dolgellau chalice and paten is one of the finest pieces of British medieval metalwork.
The influence of Antiquity on the Renaissance can be sensed in Aspertini's expressive Virgin and Child and the sensual Mars, Venus and Cupid by Palma Vecchio.
HOW TO FIND US
The National Museum of Wales's main building is situated in Cathays Park in Cardiff's beautiful civic centre.
PLANNING YOUR VISIT
On and off street parking is available within easy walking distance of the museum and coach parties can be dropped off at the main entrance.
There is a restaurant and also a museum book/gift shop.
Facilities for the disabled include a lift, toilets and loan of invalid chairs.
There is a programme of temporary exhibitions throughout the year.
Further information on these can be obtained from the Department of Public Services.
CARDIFF CASTLE
TRAVEL BACK THROUGH 1900 YEARS OF HISTORY
CITY OF CARDIFF
Cardiff castle has a history of more than 1900 years dating from the coming of the Romans in the first century.
They realised the strategic importance of the site and used it as a naval base and trading post.
Unfortunately, after the Romans left in the 4th century, very little is known of the inhabitants of the area until the arrival of the Normans in the 11th century.
The Roman defences were still in place, and the Normans used them as the foundations of their medieval fortress.
Through the years it passed into the possession of many Norman knights, nobility and royalty until in the 18th century, by marriage, it came to the family of the Marquesses of Bute.
The 3rd Marquess of Bute together with his renowned architect William Burges transformed the castle into the marvellous place which can be seen by visitors today.
This was made possible by the presentation of the castle, by the 5th Marquess of Bute, to the City of Cardiff in 1947.
MULTILINGUAL OFFICIAL GUIDE AVAILABLE
This is the ideal venue for functions such as wedding receptions, business meetings and corporate promotions.
Roman Walls
Keep built by the Normans
Medieval Halls and Towers
Victorian Restoration
Welch Regiment Museum
Medieval Banquets
1st The Queen's Dragoon Guards Museum
Colourful Peacocks
OPEN 362 DAYS A YEAR
CHEPSTOW
A CASTLE AT WAR
KEEPING THE HISTORY OF WALES ALIVE
Set in beautiful landscape, Chepstow castle is magnificently sited high upon a river cliff above the Wye.
Throughout the Middle Ages it was situated at the centre of a major marcher lordship, guarding one of the principal river crossings from southern England into Wales.
It is one of the few sites which illustrate the many phases of castle building in Britain.
Beginning as one of the earliest stone-built castles in the entire country, Chepstow was to be modified and developed in successive stages right through to the Civil War of the Seventeenth century.
Today, its picturesque silhouette continues to hug the cliffline, as a familiar and engaging site for travellers taking this ancient route into south Wales.
William fitz Osbern's great Tower
Window in kitchen block
Fourteenth-century food preparation: from the Luttrell Psalter (Copyright: The British Library)
Visit this major exhibition located in the former service rooms of the castle's great hall.
The displays cover the growth and development of one of Britain's foremost medieval strongholds under its succession of powerful castellans.
Upstairs, in which was once the lord's private chamber, the story changes to the Civil War under King Charles 1, and the part Chepstow played in this tragic conflict.
CHEPSTOW AND THE CIVIL WAR
The exhibition includes displays of original and replica armour, together with military uniforms and hand weapons of the time.
The reasons which led to the Civil War of 1642–48 are explained, and the parts Chepstow and its lord played in it are outlined.
There is a partial recreation of a dramatic battle scene, with life-size models in armour and full battle dress.
The effects of the war locally are explored, as families with differing allegiances were set one against the other.
A new account of the Civil war in Wales —‘A Nation Under Siege’ by Peter Gaunt, can be purchased from the castle shop.
CHEPSTOW — THE DEVELOPMENT OF A MEDIEVAL CASTLE
The exhibition illustrates the story of the medieval castle and the powerful men who built it.
A series of four specially-commissioned models depict the various stages of building throughout the Middle Ages.
The displays provide a vivid insight into the way the castle grew in response to new developments in contemporary warfare.
Coins of King Charles I.
Reproduction Civil War arms and armour
Part of the Civil War battle tableau
William fitz Osbern, earl of Hereford, and builder of the original castle, from one of the scenes
An unwelcome visitor around food scraps in the castle service rooms!
Chepstow Castle: reconstruction at c.1300
heritage IN WALES
Caring for 6,000 years of history
JOIN TODAY & ENJOY ALL THESE BENEFITS
Free entry to all historic attractions in the care of Cadw
Half price admission to sites in the care of English Heritage and Historic Scotland, with free access in your second year
Free Cadw information pack
Free Newspaper (3 times a year)
…and you can join at most major Cadw sites.
Published by Cadw: Welsh Historic Monuments © 1991 Printed in Great Britain 
South-west view of Chepstow Castle
CAERLEON ISCA
ISCA
The legionary fortress of Isca was one of the three principal military bases in Roman Britain.
Today much still remains to be seen of Caerleon's magnificent Roman past.
Caerleon offers a fascinating and exciting day out for all the family.
Ermine Street Guard
LEG II AVG
The Second Augustan Legion — a body of 5,600 heavy infantry — spearheaded the final Roman advance into South Wales.
For over 200 years the legion had its headquarters at Isca .
THE BARRACKS
Caerleon has the only remains of Roman legionary barracks on view anywhere in Europe.
Each of these buildings once housed a century of eighty men and its centurion.
Visitors can walk along a Roman street and discover remains of turrets, cookhouses, bread-ovens and a latrine.
AMPHITHEATRE
The Roman Amphitheatre —‘King Arthur's Round Table’ of local tradition — stands just outside the fortress walls.
Designed to seat 5,000 spectators, the Amphitheatre was used for colourful festivals as well as bloody spectacles — gladiatorial combat and animal baiting.
Today it continues to provide an evocative setting for theatrical events and festivals.
A pleasant walk along the Roman defence brings visitors to the southern corner of the fortress, where the recently conserved wall stands almost to its original height.
LEGIONARY MUSEUM
The exhibition in the spacious new museum illustrates the history of Roman Caerleon and the daily life of the garrison.
The soldiers of the legion are vividly portrayed by three lifesize figures — a centurion, a standard-bearer and a legionary.
Many fascinating discoveries are on display:
Arms, armour and equipment of the Roman soldier
Tombstones of legionaries and their families
A remarkable collection of engraved gemstones from the Fortress baths
An intriguing labyrinth mosaic
Early Roman finds from the legionary base at Usk
FORTRESS BATHS
This architectural showpiece of the Roman fortress served as the main leisure and social centre for the soldiers.
The massive building, whose concrete vaults once stood sixty feet high, was one of the largest baths in the Roman province.
Discovered as recently as 1964, the cold-hall and open-air swimming pool are now displayed under cover.
Visitors are guided through the baths as they would have appeared in Roman times by artists' reconstructions, spoken commentaries and fascinating computer graphics.
CAERLEON TODAY
Caerleon is an attractive historic village with much to offer visitors drawn by its important Roman heritage.
Encircled by a broad sweep of the River Usk, old Caerleon includes many buildings of interest — as fine pubs, shops and family eating places.
Caerleon serves as a centre both for walkers and motorists exploring the beautiful countryside of the Usk valley and eastern Gwent.
CARDIFF BAY ATTRACTIONS
Welsh Industrial and Maritime Museum is located at the heart of Cardiff Bay adjacent to the former West Bute Dock Basin.
Here railways brought coal and iron from the industries of the hinterland to the docks for shipping to all parts of the world.
The story of how industry, road, rail and sea transport evolved in and around Wales is told in a variety of exhibitions.
Hall of Power — a range of engines and heavy machinery, most of which are in working order and operated daily.
Outside Exhibits
Include the sailing cutter ‘Kindly Light’ and the live steam replica of the world's first railway locomotive, Trevithick's Penydarren Locomotive of 1804.
Q-shed
The exhibition Travelling the Waves’ presents the story of sea-borne passenger travel around and beyond the coast of Wales.
Railway Gallery
The story of railways in Wales told through superb visual displays plus ten steam locomotives of the Wales Railway Centre.
126 Bute Street
A simulated dockside environment presents life in the days of Sail and Steam in the Docks as Cardiff became the greatest coal-exporting port in the world.
Steam Days
On the first Saturday of every month from April to October the museum's collection of engines is steamed with visitor participation.
Road Transport Collection
A number of rare vehicles, especially horse drawn trams and business.
For further information please ring: Cardiff (0222) 481919
TECHNIQUEST is designed to give fun to people of all ages and abilities and is ideal for family outings, school trips, birthday parties, coach trips, business lunches and office parties.
PUZZLEQUEST is also based at TECHNIQUEST.
Disabled visitors are very welcome, there is good wheelchair access to most exhibits and facilities.
As a ‘hands-on’ science centre active participation is encouraged and our friendly helpers are at hand to answer your questions.
For further information about the exhibition please ring (0222) 460211.
Cardiff Bay Visitor Centre (opening Autumn 1990) will provide a futuristic showcase of the entire Bay Developments with a three dimensional model of the Bay, a 15 screen video wall, information displays, offices and spectacular views across the inner harbour.
Inside the innovative tube-shaped building, visitors will be able to see the renaissance of South Cardiff and its docklands and enjoy a vision of the future.
VISIT Wolfscastle Pottery
Enjoy the creative atmosphere
We make Lively and Functional Stoneware
Mugs, casseroles, goblets, plant-pots, tea, coffee, dinner sets and individual pieces in both decorative and plain traditional glazes.
Try your hand at the Potter's wheel.
Children will love modelling in clay.
Also at: ‘THE POTTERY’, High Street, St. David's — where we also sell antique maps and prints.
Browse at leisure, watch the potters at work
WOLFSCASTLE AND ST.
DAVID'S POTTERIES
Madeleine and Philip Cunningham were married in 1961 and have three children.
They entered the Medway College of Design as mature students to study pottery, and in 1973 came to Wolfscastle to establish their Workshop.
Their pottery is both beautiful and practical, bold rims to stop chipping and strong handles that do not break.
Everything is designed, used and tested in Madeleine's kitchen before it is put into production.
All of their pottery is ovenproof (including microwave), dishwasher and freezer proof.
The glazes are lead free and non-toxic.
Philip makes the larger pots and Madeleine the more decorative and delicate ware.
They enjoy sharing their pleasure in their work with visitors and the Showroom is designed so that they can see the work in progress.
Their clay, St. Thomas's stoneware, comes from Stoke-on-Trent.
They make their own glazes from finely ground rocks to recipes that they have developed over the years.
The newly made pots are glazed when they are completely dry and are fired to 1,285° Centigrade in their ‘top hat ceramic fibre glass kiln’ which they designed and built.
The kiln, which is fired about once a week, takes 2 days to heat and cool down.
It uses 400 lbs.
of gas for each firing.
Opening the kiln is always a moment of great excitement.
Firing a gas kiln is an art and despite all his care the potter submits his ware to the flames and delights in the subtle variations that are beyond his control.
Each and every pot is different and contrasts richly with the mass produced product.
Their residential courses held throughout the year for both beginners and advanced students are widely known and popular; students come from all over the world.
A delightful country cottage adjoining the house is available to rent during the school holidays.
Try your hand at the wheel
KEEPING THE HISTORY OF WALES ALIVE
CASTLES & HISTORIC PLACES
SOUTH & WEST WALES
SOUTH & WEST WALES
Both South Wales and West Wales have rich and varied histories and are full of the unexpected.
Take Castell Coch, a Victorian fantasy straight out of the pages of ‘Sleeping Beauty’, situated just north of Cardiff.
Another surprise awaits the visitor at Caerphilly, home of one of Europe's greatest surviving medieval fortresses, which ranks in size with that of Windsor.
Caerleon, the legionary fortress of Isca , boasts the atmospheric remains of a Roman amphitheatre and baths complex, whilst in the beautiful Wye Valley can be found the substantial ruins of Tintern Abbey and Chepstow Castle.
A spectacular coastline and rugged hills characterize West Wales.
The Pembrokeshire Coast National Park embraces 170 miles of superb seashore and the mysterious Preseli Hills, while further east, the Brecon Beacons National Park encapsulates a wild landscape.
At St Davids, site of an early Christian community, is the graceful and once magnificent Bishop's Palace, which stands next to the impressive cathedral.
Lamphey Place, two miles east of Pembroke, was an important possession of the bishops of St Davids.
A visit here offers an experience of the tranquillity and wellbeing enjoyed by its former occupants.
Peaceful Kidwelly is dominated by a castle of great and surprising strength.
Deep in the hills, Carreg Cennen, perched on a crag in the brooding Black Mountains, is one of the Wales' most dramatically sited fortresses.
The built heritage of South and West Wales in Cadw's care includes fascinating prehistoric, Roman, medieval and historic industrial sites — enough to capture the interest of all ages and plenty for the general and specialist visitor to enjoy.
JOIN HERITAGE IN WALES
and help us care for 6000 years of history
As a member you will enjoy all these advantages:
Free entry to all Cadw attractions where charges are made.
Half price admission to English and Scottish sites, with free access in your second year.
Free Cadw information pack.
Free Newspaper — three times a year.
Discounts on Cadw gifts.
You can join at most major Cadw sites.
TINTERN ABBEY
The impressive ruins of Tintern, seen against the green wooded slopes of the Wye Valley, or in the autumn against the reds and golds of the dying foliage, are justly world famous and inspired William Wordsworth's famous poem.
It is noted for its majestic arches, fine doorways and elegant windows.
This was a Cistercian house founded in 1131 by Walter de Clare and survived until the Dissolution of the Monasteries under Henry VIII in the 1530s.
The building reveals very clearly the daily life of monks.
The centre of their life was the abbey church, which still survives almost intact, the view through the east window of the wooded slopes being particularly memorable.
The new shop offers visitors a range of quality gifts and publications.
A small exhibition on the abbey is situated near the shop and self-guided audio-cassette tours help reveal the abbey's history and the Cistercian way of life.
CASTELL COCH
This enchanting little castle is a combination of Victorian Gothic fantasy and timeless fairytale.
Its round towers and conical turrets peep unexpectedly through the trees on the hills north of Cardiff.
The castle was the creation of two men hopelessly in love with the Middle Ages, the fabulously wealthy Lord Bute and his architect, the ‘eccentric genius’, William Burges.
Work began in August 1875 on a site intended s a country retreat and companion piece to Lord Bute's opulent castle in the centre of Cardiff.
The castle is a decorative extravaganza.
Fantastic mural depicting Aesop's fables decorate the ceilings and walls of the drawing room and Lord and Lady Bute's bedrooms offer interesting contrasts in style and comfort.
An exhibition provides an illustrated history of Bute, of Burges and the buildings they created.
Tintern Abbey, one of the loveliest of all the ruined British monasteries, surrounded by a tree-covered landscape of wild natural beauty.
The Well Tower & Courtyard
The spectacular Kitchen Tower and Keep
The Banqueting Hall
The Drawing Room ceiling
CAERPHILLY CASTLE
This vast fortress is one of the greatest surviving castles of the medieval western world.
Caerphilly's huge 30-acre site is equalled in size among British castles only at Dover and perhaps Windsor.
With its massive gatehouses, water defence and concentric lines of defence the castle was virtually impregnable against contemporary methods.
The construction of Caerphilly proper began in 1268, with work of Earl Gilbert de Clare.
It was destroyed in 1270 by Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, Prince of Wales, and rebuilt by the Earl in 1271.
The castle, dominating its surroundings, represents a high point of medieval military architecture.
Striking features of this formidable fortress include the splendid Great hall and the ruined tower — the victim of substance — which manages to out-lean even Pisa!
There is a ‘Castle of Wales’ exhibition in the north-west tower, while, in the outer gate, there is an exhibition describing Caerphilly's many stages of development.
Visitors can also discover more about the castle with the popular cassette tour.
EVENTS
There are a number of events taking place at Castles and historic places in the care of Cadw during 1991 — music, drama and historical re-enactments — for further information and a copy of our events brochure, contact Cadw or any of the historic sites described in this brochure or Tourist Information Centres in Wales.
CHEPSTOW CASTLE
Set in a beautiful landscape, Chepstow has been a strategic fortress for hundreds of years.
The castle, high up on its river cliff above the Wye, guards one of the main  crossings from England to Wales.
Visitors can trace the history of medieval fortification from a stone hall-keep built within a decade of the battle of Hastings in 1066 by one of William the Conqueror's principal lieutenants, through the gun loops of the 17th century.
It demonstrates perhaps better than any other, the changes in medieval military fortification.
The keep, the earliest dateable secular stone building in Britain, would be quite at home in 11th century Normandy or on the Loire.
Chepstow is unusual among British castles in that it was built largely of stone from the first with no primary timber phase.
The barbican was a significant addition of the younger Marshalls (sons of William Marshall), its tower and gateway deserving careful scrutiny.
The hall complex, to the right of the entrance to the castle, and built by Roger Bigod III, was intended as accommodation for his large household and for guests.
A major exhibition at the site ‘A Castle at War’ reflects the changing role of Chepstow throughout the Middle Ages.
Life size models of the medieval lords, and a dramatic civil war battle scene, are just some of the attractions.
Magnificent Caerphilly Castle surrounded by its lakes
The ‘Castles of Wales’ exhibition inside the north-west tower
Festival of Roman Life with the Ermine Street Guard at Caerleon
Display of Civil War arms and armour
Scene from the dramatic ‘Chepstow — A Castle at War’ exhibition
Aerial view of Chepstow Castle on a river cliff above the Wye
RAGLAN CASTLE
Raglan Castle belongs mainly to the 15th century and was as much a product of social grandeur, as it was military necessity.
It was begun, probably on the site of a small Norman castle, in the 1430s by Sir William ap Thomas.
His Great Tower or ‘Yellow Tower’ of Gwent is strikingly positioned outside the castle walls and its strength was almost sufficient to defy Cromwell's demolition engineers.
Only after ‘tedious battering the top thereof with pick-axes’ did they eventually undermine two of its six sides bringing them down and leaving the tower in the state in which it is today.
The tower is unusual in its hexagonal plan and elaborate drawbridge arrangements, two features which are more typical of northern France.
The hall was the finest apartment at Raglan and hints of its splendour can be seen in the windows, moulded roof corbels and the huge fireplace.
Other notable features of the castle include the Fountain Court, the Pitched Stone Court, a buttery, pantry, Kitchen Tower, Closet tower, office wing, south gate, chapel and state apartments.
An exhibition on the history of Raglan is situated in the Closet tower and two rooms of the gate passage.
The Great Tower of Raglan Castle, still surrounded by water defence
KIDWELLY CASTLE
One of the finest castles in West Wales, it remains remarkably intact.
Kidwelly is an outstanding example of late 13th-century castle design, with its ‘walls within walls’ defensive system.
Kidwelly was established within a short time of the Norman Conquest, and added to by various baronial families during the reign of King Edward I and later.
A three-storeyed gatehouse attracts particular attention.
The castle commands the estuary of the Gwendraeth Fach on the route of the Norman road to West Wales.
Thanks to its coastal location, it could be easily supplied with food and ammunition by sea if cut off by hostile forces from the lands.
Mighty Kidwelly castle in a peaceful location by the sea
CAERLEON ROMAN FORTRESS
The town of Caerleon-on-Usk overlies the Roman military base of Isca , the fortress of the second Augustan Legion.
Established about AD 75, the 50-acre fortress held some 5,500 heavily armed soldiers.
Today, the remains include:
The Fortress Baths:Excavated in the 1970s, and representing the most complete example of a Roman legionary bath building in Britain,(with videos, models, reconstructions, lighting effects and information panels.)
The Amphitheatre:Built around AD 90 for the brutal sport and games of which the Romans were so fond, as well as a place of assembly and training for the troops.
The Barracks:A short walk from the amphitheatre.
The remains of the only legionary barrack blocks to be seen in Europe.
Also in Caerleon is the Roman Legionary Museum which holds many fascinating artefacts excavated from the remains.
The Roman Amphitheatre stands just outside the fortress walls
ST DAVIDS BISHOP'S PALACE
As it stands, the richly decorative bishop's palace was built largely by Henry de Gower (1328–47).
It is situated within the Cathedral Close, among a group of medieval buildings unique in Wales.
The battlements, curtain walls and gatehouse speak eloquently of great men, rich in experience of church and state.
Of note are the Bishop Henry's arcaded parapets, decorated with some of the finest medieval sculptured heads and animal figures in Wales (along both main wings of the palace), the piscina in the Palace Chapel, and also the entrance to the Great Hall.
The Bishop's Palace also houses an exhibition on ‘Life in the Palace of a Prince of the Church’.
Peaceful St Davids Bishop's Palace with its 14th century arcaded parapet
BLAENAVON IRONWORKS
Blaenavon is probably one of the finest and most complete ironworks of the Industrial Revolution to survive in Europe.
Its bank of five blast furnaces and the unusual water balance tower can still be seen.
CARREG CENNEN CASTLE
Carreg Cennen stands on a great crag almost 300 feet above the river Cennen, on a site of truly spectacular defensive qualities.
The castle commands a magnificent vista of the Brecon Beacons National Park.
An exciting feature here is an underground passage leading to a cave deep beneath the ruins.
The farm at the site operates a rare breeds centre and also has a tea room with traditional fare.
Carreg Cennen standing high on its rocky bluff
TRETOWER COURT & CASTLE
This glorious late medieval home is set in the beautiful Usk valley, midway between Abergavenny and Brecon.
The castle, is located across an open meadow to the rear.
The site features an entertaining audio-cassette tour.
Visitors can also view the early stages of a ‘medieval’ garden which is being created.
Tretower Court in the lovely Usk Valley
CILGERRAN CASTLE
Begun in the 1220's, two powerful towers on a crag are the dominant features of this castle, which stands above a deep gorge overlooking the River Teifi, famed for its coracle fishermen.
The two powerful towers of Cilgerran Castle
COITY CASTLE
An early Norman stronghold.
In the Owain Glyndwr uprising, the castle withstood a long siege by the Welsh.
LAMPHEY BISHOP'S PALACE
One of the more important possessions of the bishops of St Davids, the palace provides us with a fine example of the way medieval bishops combined the lift of a prelate with that of a country gentleman.
11th century Lamphey Bishop's Palace
LLAWHADEN CASTLE
The remains of this fortified residence, belonging to the bishops of St Davids, was build largely between the late 13th and 15th centuries.
NEATH ABBEY
Very complete ruins of a Cistercian abbey, which was initially founded by Richard de Granville in 1130.
Converted to an Elizabethan great house following the dissolution of the Monasteries, the abbey has a peaceful atmosphere.
Neath Abbey
STRATA FLORIDA
Founded in 1164, the ruins of this Cistercian abbey stand in a lovely valley, once known as ‘The Vale of Flowers’, from which the site takes its Latin name.
Strata Florida Abbey in a lovely valley setting
TALLEY ABBEY
The buildings date to the early 13th century, and the abbey is set in the beautiful Llandeilo hills.
It was founded for canons of the Premonstratensian order.
WEOBLEY CASTLE
Constructed in the late 13th century, this late medieval fortified house combined domestic comfort with security and is one of the Gower peninsula's most interesting historic sites.
There is an exhibition on the history of the Gower and other historic sites nearby.
Weobley Castle perched on the edge of the northern scarp
WHITE CASTLE
First built in stone about 1180, with later additions in the 13th century, the name of this Norman castle probably derives from the white plaster which once covered its walls.
White Castle
OTHER CASTLES AND HISTORIC BUILDINGS
Besides those in the care of Cadw, the following sites are well worth visiting this area:
WEST WALES
Carew Castle
Built between 1280 and 1310, the castle was enlarged considerably in the 15th century.
The long gallery and large windows show the transition from stronghold to country house.
Carew French Mill
the only tidal mill remaining intact in Wales.
Castell Henllys Iron Age Settlement
A late prehistoric site gradually being uncovered by archaeologists.
A hut has been reconstructed and ‘experiments’ in Iron Age technology are taking place.
Dolaucothi Roman Gold Mines
a likely source of gold bullion for the Imperial Mints of Lyons and Rome.
Haverfordwest Castle
A striking landmark, standing on an 80 ′ hill above the river Cleddau in the centre of this ancient town.
Manorbier Castle
A captivating site in a superb coastal location.
The castle is famous as the birthplace in 1146 of the scholar-priest Gerald of Wales.
Pembroke Castle
Undoubtedly one of the greatest castles in Britain.
William Marshall's powerful round keep is the dominant feature.
Picton Castle
In the hands of the same family since the 15th century, the castle now houses an art gallery with a fine collection of Graham Sutherland paintings.
St Govan's Chapel, Bosherston
Nestling in a rocky gorge, the 13th century chapel lies on a spectacular stretch of coast.
Tenby Castle and Town Walls
The castle is ruinous, but lies on a green headland overlooking the harbour.
The walls are the best surviving example in southern Wales.
Tenby Tudor Merchant's House
A beautifully furnished late medieval dwelling house near the harbour.
SOUTH WALES
Abergavenny Castle
A Norman site with late 13th and 14th century buildings.
Caldicot Castle
The sturdy round keep a fine 14th century gatehouse are notable features here.
Cardiff Castle
A Roman fort chosen as the site for a Norman castle.
It was rebuilt in the 19th century as an extravagant and idealized vision of the Middle Ages for the third Marquis of the Bute by the architect William Burges.
Cold Knap Roman Building
Remains of a unique roman building overlooking the seashore.
Cosmeston medieval Village
A deserted medieval village gradually being uncovered by archaeologists.
Several buildings have been reconstructed.
Margam Abbey
Cistercian abbey founded in 1147, with a superb 18th century orangery in the adjacent Country Park.
Oystermouth Castle
Extensive ruins dating from the late 13th and 14th centuries, overlooking Swansea Bay.
Penhow Castle
The oldest ‘lived in’ castle in Wales, with stout Norman keep and magnificent 15th-century hall.
Tredegar House, Newport
A fine 17th-century red-bricked house, with magnificent Restoration facade.
It stands in a 9-acre Country Park.
St Fagan's Castle and Welsh Folk Museum
A glorious Elizabethan mansion.
Rural buildings from all over Wales have been re-erected in the extensive grounds.
SOUTH/MID WALES
Abbey Cwmhir
Cistercian abbey founded in 1143 and traditionally the burial place of Llywelyn the Last.
Aberystwyth Castle
One of King Edward I's first castles in Wales.
The remains of a diamond-shaped plan overlook the windy headland.
Builth Castle
Formidable earthworks remains of a substantial motte and bailey.
KEEPING THE HISTORY OF WALES ALIVE
CASTLES & HISTORIC PLACES
NORTH & MID WALES
NORTH & MID WALES
The rocky heights of the Snowdonia National Park dominate the scene here.
The high point in medieval military architecture was achieved by an iron chain of fortresses built by King Edward I to emphasize his hold over the native Welsh.
Caernarfon, Conwy, Beaumaris, Harlech, Flint and Denbigh…all have their still-powerful grey-stoned castles where echoes of military might still abound.
Caernarfon's soaring defence are famous the world over.
Conwy's atmospheric cluster of lofty towers and town walls, 700 years on, still stamp their authority on the landscape.
Harlech Castle commands vistas across the sands, dunelands and estuaries of Cardigan and Tremadog Bays.
The Isle of Anglesey boasts one of the finest collections of prehistoric remains in Wales, and in Beaumaris, the medieval castle his acknowledged as the best of its kind in Britain.
Less well known, but no fascinating, are the strongholds of the native Welsh princes deep in the mountains, like Llywelyn the Great Dolwyddelan and Dolbadarn.
In contrast the lovely ruins of Valle Crucis Abbey, in the pastoral Vale of Llangollen, are typical of those isolated sites sought by the Cistercian order.
The area's hills and mountains, sandy and secluded coastline embrace so much history — everything from prehistoric burial chambers to Roman forts and medieval monuments.
Harlech's powerful main gatehouse
JOIN HERITAGE IN WALES
and help us care for 6000 years of history
As a member you will enjoy all these advantages:
Free entry to all Cadw attractions where charges are made.
Half price admission to English and Scottish sites, with free access in your second year.
Free Cadw information pack.
Free Newspaper — three times a year.
Discounts on Cadw gifts.
You can join at most major Cadw sites.
CAERNARFON CASTLE
World Heritage Listed Site
The castle earned itself a place in modern history on 1 July 1969 when it was the setting for the Investiture of HRH Prince Charles as Prince of Wales.
Caernarfon was also the scene for the Investiture of Prince Edward in 1911.
Ever since this time, Caernarfon Castle has been the venue for many royal tours of Wales.
Over the years it has received King George VI and Queen Elizabeth (the present Queen Mother) after the Coronation in 1937; Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II in 1953 after her own Coronation, and more recently the Prince and Princess of Wales on their first tour in 1981.
A new publication for 1991 —‘Caernarfon: A Royal Palace in Wales’ by Charles Kightly can be bought by visitors in the castle shop.
Begun in 1283 by Edward I, it is one of Europe's great medieval fortresses.
As the new seat of government for North Wales, it was the birth place in 1284 of its new English prince, the ill-fated Edward II.
Legend says it was here that Edward I showed his baby son to the Welsh as ‘the native-born prince who could speak no English’.
In fact, Caernarfon is the nearest building Wales has to a royal palace having been owned continuously by the Crown ever since Edward I established it in 1283.
The majestic castle walls, with their varying bands of stone, were modelled on the walls of Constantinople.
There is a haunting beauty about Caernarfon today, and it welcomes many thousands of visitors from many countries each year.
The castle has much to interest the visitor: the King's Gate has been described as the mightiest in the land; the Eagle Tower houses an exhibition and audio visual programme; the Queen's Tower is the home of the Royal Welch Fusiliers Regimental Museum; the North-East Tower houses the Prince of Wales' Exhibition; and the Chamberlain Tower has an exhibition on the Castles of Edward I.
The Royal town is now a market centre for the Lleyn Peninsular and Anglesey.
Saturday is market day.
Ideal as a base for touring the Snowdonia National Park, Caernarfon is also popular for sailing and regular boat-trips run from the quay-side by the castle in the summer months.
EVENTS 1991
There are a number of events taking place at Castles and historic places in the care of Cadw during 1991.
For further information and a copy of our events brochure, contact any of the historic sites described in this brochure or the Wales Tourist Board's Tourist Information Centres.
Ceremonial padlock and key
A ‘living history’ experience for primary schoolchildren at Dolwyddelan Castle
Royal Welch Fusiliers Museum
Upper ward from opening in Eagle Tower
The Prince of Wales Exhibition
The dramatic audio-visual programme in the Eagle Tower
There are wonderful views in all directions from the castle turrets
CONWY CASTLE
World Heritage Listed Site
One of the most picturesque of Welsh castles, and a masterpiece of medieval architecture.
Built by Edward I as part of his master plan to subdue the Welsh, Conwy was both fortress and garrison town.
Outside the castle gates visitors will find one of the finest and most complete circuits of town walls anywhere in Europe — over three quarters of a mile in length with 22 towers and three original gateways.
Built between 1283 and 1289, the castle's shape is dictated by the very rock on which it stands.
It has barbicans at either end, and eight massive towers.
From any viewpoint Conwy, with its beautifully proportioned towers is a splendid sight.
First impressions are of tremendous military strength, a dominating position and a unit and compactness of design.
The narrowness of the ledge of the rock on which the castle stands dictated the shape of the great hall, 125 feet in length, which was built to a unique bowed plan in three sections and is perhaps one of the most interesting features of the castle.
The Conwy Castle Information Centre includes not only a tourist information centre but a shop selling a wide range of quality gifts and publications together with an exhibition on Edward I and his castles in Wales.
In addition, on the top floor of the Chapel tower there is a perfectly scaled model of the castle and town as it may have appeared around 1310.
Regular guided tours of the castle are available.
Conwy Town is a picturesque and richly historic touring centre.
Along the quay in the shelter of these ancient walls is an old world full of interest.
Conwy's river and estuary bustle with activity, with a small fishing fleet adding colour to the scene.
HARLECH CASTLE
World Heritage Listed Site
Harlech formed part of a distinct military plan and its power and might are unquestioned even today, 700 years after the castle was built.
Its soaring walls and towers are challenged for supremacy only by the purple mass of distant Snowdonia.
These rugged peaks played a large part in determining Harlech's siting as one of the so-called ‘iron-ring’ of fortresses, built to contain the Welsh in their mountain fastness.
The castle, constructed largely between 1283 and 1289, was the work of the English Monarch, Edward I, and represents a high point in medieval castle-building.
Views from the battlements and wall-walks are truly panoramic — the high peaks of Snowdonia are just one ingredient in a scene which extends across the waters of Tremadog Bay, to the long arm of the Lleyn Peninsula.
The castle's great glory — its massive, twin-towered gatehouse — maintains an air of impregnability.
But it is one of history's ironies that this castle, built to subdue the Welsh by an English king, was captured in 1404 by Owain Glyndwr.
An exhibition situated in the castle gatehouse, ‘A Castle and its People’, completes a visit.
Part of the superb exhibition ‘A Castle and Its people’ at Harlech Castle
CRICCIETH CASTLE
Established around 1230 by the Welsh prince Llywelyn the Great, the castle stands perched on its rocky peninsula over the little seaside resort and commands superb views over Tremadog Bay.
One of the castle's most splendid features is the high twin-towered gatehouse.
Captured in 1404 by Owain Clyndwr, the castle was sacked and burnt, never to rise again.
Criccieth houses two exhibitions, one on the castle of native Welsh princes and another on Gerald of Wales and the Welsh Princes, both recipients of Britain's top heritage interpretation award for 1991 (from the Society for the Interpretation of Britain's Heritage).
The delightful seaside location of Criccieth Castle
Scene from the award-winning Gerald of Wales exhibition at the entrance to Criccieth
CYMER ABBEY
Cistercian abbey, founded in a peaceful and remote spot at the head of the Mawddach estuary in 1199.
DOLWYDDELAN CASTLE
Built by the Welsh princes in the 13th century, Dolwyddelan still guards its landlocked mountain pass.
An exhibition on the castles of the Welsh princes is located in the keep.
BEAUMARIS CASTLE
World Heritage Listed Site
Beaumaris was the last and largest of the castles built by Edward I to contain the Welsh Begun in 1295 on a virgin site overlooking the Menai Strait, the new castle was given the French name of Beau Mareys (Beautiful Marsh).
The flat site enabled the King's mason-architect, Master James of St George, to build a castle of geometric symmetry.
Although never completed, Beaumaris is the most perfect example of the concentrically planned castle in Britain.
Any attack on Beaumaris would have been presented with formidable problems.
The original water filled moat, forms the first line of defence, followed by a ring of outer walls and a series of evenly spaced towers.
Should the attackers overcome these obstacles they would then be caught in deadly crossfire from archers positioned on the next series of walls and towers protecting the central core.
In its time the castle had connections with the sea — the old tidal dock can still be seen, though the short channel which gave seaborne access has long since disappeared.
There is an exhibition on the castles of Edward I in the Chapel Tower.
The moat and outer curtain wall at Beaumaris Castle, Edward I's masterpiece’
DENBIGH CASTLE & TOWN WALL
The castle was begun by Henry de Lacy in 1282; Denbigh is also noted for the almost complete circuit of town walls.
The inspiring and impressive castle gatehouse, with a trio of towers, and a superb archway, is surmounted by a figure believed to be that of Edward I. Visit the exhibition and nearby Denbigh Friary, Leicester's Church and St Hilary's Chapel.
VALLE CRUCIS ABBEY
The lovely ruins of 13th-century Valle Crucis — where white-robed Cistercian monks once worshipped — are set beside the Eglwyseg stream in a narrow valley.
Visitors can see the sculptured memorial slabs in the monks' dormitory and a small exhibition on the Cistercian monks and the abbey.
The Eisteddfod town of Llangollen is only a short distance away.
DOLBADARN CASTLE
Built by Llywelyn the Great in the early 13th century, this Welsh castle overlooks Llyn Padarn in the Llanberis Pass.
Set in a landscape of breathtaking grandeur
FLINT CASTLE
Begun in 1277, Flint is the earliest of Edward's I Welsh castles.
Its most impressive feature, a large round tower or donjon , commands an eastern view of the Dee estuary.
Exploring Flint Castle by the sea
DYFI FURNACE
This charcoal-burning blast furnace, dating from the mid 18th century, is largely intact and now fully conserved.
The waterwheel is fully operational.
The furnace building in its waterside setting
WELSH SLATE CENTRE
The workshop complex was built in 1870 and original equipment is on display throughout the former working area.
There are regular demonstrations of the machinery, as ell as the delicate art of slate splitting by hand.
GWYDIR UCHAF CHAPEL
Built in 1673 by the owner of Gwydir House, it is especially notable for its 17th century painted ceiling.
Detail of the charming interior
OTHER CASTLES AND HISTORIC BUILDINGS
Besides those in the care of Cadw, the following sites are well worth visiting in this area:
MID WALES
Aberystwyth Castle
One of King Edward I's first castles in Wales.
The remains of a diamond-shaped plan overlook the windy headland.
Powis Castle
One of the most ancient and historic houses in Wales.
Although medieval in origin, it contains architecture of many later periods, including superb 16th- and 17th-century work.
The formal gardens were laid out in the 18th century.
ANGLESEY
Beaumaris Courthouse and Gaol
The courthouse was built in 1614.
The gaol dates to 1829 and includes cells and a treadmill.
Plas Newydd
Given to the National trust by the Marquess of Anglesey, this magnificent 18th-century mansion stands in 169 acres of gardens, parks and woodland.
NORTH WALES
Aberconwy House, Conwy
A 14th-century timber-framed house, within the medieval walls of the town.
Bodrhyddan Hall, Rhuddlan
A dignified red-bricked manor house of the late 17th century, with a collection of paintings, furniture and armour.
Bryn Bras Castle, Llanrug
A 19th-century castle, it stands in extensive well-tended gardens.
Castell Dinas Bran, Llangollen
Dramatically sited ruins, situated within the ramparts of an Iron Age hillfort.
Chirk Castle
First built at the time of Edward I, it has been occupied through to the present day.
There are fine state rooms of the 18th and 19th centuries.
Erddig, Wrexham
Acquired by the national trust in 1973, the late 17th century house has been restored to its former glory.
Felin Isaf Water Mill, Llansantffraid Glan Conwy
Fully restored flour mill with much of its machinery dating back to 1730.
Gwrych Castle, Abergele
A 19th century house built in the mock medieval style.
Gwydir Castle
Fine country house, with beautiful formal gardens.
Penrhyn Castle
A huge castle built in the Norman style between 1820–37 by Thomas Hopper for Lord Penrhyn.
This outstanding building stands amongst attractive woodland and grounds.
Plas Mawr, Conwy
An Elizabethan house with superb ornamental plasterwork.
Plas Newydd, Llangollen
A black and white mansion, home of the famous late 18th-century ‘Ladies of Llangollen’.
CARMARTHEN BAY…
AND TEIFI VALLEY
DYLAN THOMAS COUNTRY
Welcome
This beautiful area of West Wales extends from the shores of Carmarthen Bay and takes in the magnificent Towy and Teifi Valleys.
The District has always held a special place in history and, more recently, is world famous for its links with Dylan Thomas as a place where he sought sanctuary and derived inspiration to perfect his writings.
The lush countryside provides rich farming land and the market towns and villages literally overflow with that magical Welsh character and way of life.
Carmarthen, Dyfed's Country Town, remains West Wales' premier leisure, cultural and shopping centre.
Carmarthen Bay & Teifi Valley brings together an array of scenic contrasts including a protected coastline, picturesque Welsh seaside villages, breathtaking river and forest scenery and Llanybydder Mountain to the east of the Teifi Valley.
Many of the traditions and crafts of ancient Wales are evident in the countryside and a host of pastimes are available for active holidays or, for those of you who prefer a quieter pace, picturesque drives together with walks along the coast and inland.
The central location of Carmarthen Bay & Teifi Valley within the context of West Wales means that it is ideally situated both as a touring base and for that special day visit.
The River Towy and Paxton's Tower
A coracle maker demonstrates his skills at Cenarth
CARMARTHEN
COUNTY TOWN
Historic Carmarthen holds a special place in Welsh history and in Roman times was one of only two fortress towns in the Principality.
The importance of Carmarthen Town is almost certainly due to its geographical location on the River Towy.
There are tremendous leisure opportunities in Carmarthen, not least the District Leisure Centre and the Golf Club.
It is also a significant conference and cultural centre.
Carmarthen as a shopping centre continues to thrive and high street nationals blend naturally with family businesses, quality restaurants, inns and coffee shops.
Its Market is unquestionably one of the best in Wales with designated market days being Wednesdays and Saturdays, but Fridays are taking on increasing importance.
Here you will delight at the colourful stalls, the friendly bantering and the mouthwatering produce.
An abundance of crafts, antiques and other goods are on sale and adjacent is the largest livestock mart in Wales.
It is little wonder, therefore, that Carmarthen retains so much of its countryside influences.
Carmarthen's street scenes reflect bygone years as do its placenames.
The Welsh name for Carmarthen is Caerfyrddin which translates to ‘Merlin's Town’.
It is said that the Wizard of Arthurian legend was born here.
The ancient art of coracle fishing can be seen on the River Towy during the summer months and a visit to the Museum at Abergwili, just east of Carmarthen, is strongly recommended with the Roman Amphitheatre located en route at Priory Street.
Unusual hand made gifts at Carmarthen Market
International athletics at Carmarthen District Leisure Centre
Carmarthen's quaint street scenes are a delight
Teifi Valley and Brechfa Forest
The Teifi Valley provides visitors with magnificent views over open countryside and one of the finest rivers in Wales.
The valley is rich in tradition and has many rural market towns like Llanybydder, world famous for its horse sales and bustling Newcastle Emlyn with its Castle, sports facilities and steam railway.
The falls, salmon leaps and pools at Cenarth, near Newcastle Emlyn, are always a favourite with visitors.
It is also the acclaimed home of the Teifi coracle and indeed a very interesting Coracle Centre and Museum can be seen in the village where appropriate demonstrations are held.
The Museum of the Welsh Woollen Industry is at Drefach, Felindre, some 5 miles from Newcastle Emlyn.
This is one of the foremost attractions in Wales and is a branch of the National Museum.
Visitors can see an extensive collection of textile machinery dating back to the 18th century along with an exhibition tracing the development of Wales' woollen industry from the Middle Ages.
The area in and around Drefach, Felindre was Wales' most important woollen producing region a the turn of the century.
A working mill is incorporated into the development and also within the site are a water wheel, factory trails, a riverside picnic area, a craft gallery, craft workshops and a charming tea room.
Brechfa Forest is situated in the north-east of the district and links beautifully with the Teifi Valley via a most scenic drive over Llanbydder Mountain.
The forest area is very picturesque, containing breathtaking views and has designated picnic areas, traditional country inns, restaurants and country hotels.
Activities and Attractions
In additional to the many sporting activities, there are more leisurely pursuits such as pony trekking, which is an increasingly popular and peaceful way of exploring the countryside.
There are two steam railways within the district, the Gwili Railway just outside Carmarthen at Bronwydd and the Teifi Valley Railway at Henllan, near Newcastle Emly.
In addition the voluntary enthusiasts have provided excellent nature trails and picnic areas.
The seaside offers many pastimes, including swimming, sailing and windsurfing and Carmarthen Bay is certainly no exception.
At Llanarthney, in the delightful Towy Valley, is Paxton's Tower, an interesting folly owned by the National Trust and built in 1911 by Sir William Paxton as a memorial to Lord Nelson.
It is currently a popular picnic area and vantage point for the lower valley providing magnificent views over lush countryside.
Nearby is Middleton Hall, whose gardens are freely open to the public and are currently being examined for development as a Welsh National Botanical site.
The district is rich in craft workshops, traditional tea shops and country inns, with many quality evening restaurants offering local Welsh produce and dishes.
Finally, there is a tremendous sense of community belonging and pride throughout the whole of Carmarthen Bay & Teifi Valley and during the summer season especially, there exists a hole range of festivals and spectator events, such as the United Counties Agricultural Show held near Carmarthen during the second week of August.
Coracle Fishing can be seen on the rivers Teifi and Towy
Canoeing on the River Teifi
The acclaimed monthly horse sales at Llanybydder
Water sports in Carmarthen Bay
There are steam railways at Carmarthen and Newcastle Emlyn
One of the craft workshops at the Museum of the Welsh Woollen Industry
Dylan Thomas and Laugharne
Dylan Thomas had very strong links with the Carmarthen area.
For example, throughout his boyhood days in Llangain he stayed at both Fern Hill and Blaencwm with his mother's family.
The district also has other links with Dylan Thomas.
William Thomas, brother of Dylan's paternal grandfather, lived in the Brechfa area and wrote poetry and prose in Welsh under the name of Gwilym Marlais; Marlais being the name of a stream running through the village.
However, it is Laugharne which is most synonymous with Wales' most famous 20th century poet and writer, where he simply ‘stepped off the bus one day and forgot to get on again’ in the spring of 1938.
Laugharne is a picturesque blend of genteel georgian houses and tiny cottages.
The Township undoubtedly provides a central point for Under Milk Wood and indeed, Caitlin, in her autobiography, confirms that this is so.
Dylan Thomas first lived in Laugharne in the spring of 1938, moving to Sea View shortly afterwards, but did not live there permanently until 1949 when he moved to the Boat House.
This Grade 2 Listed Building is set in a rocky cliff face pointing out to sea a little way along the foreshore.
Nearby, along Dylan's Walk, is his writing shed with its spectacular views over the Tâf Estuary and where he completed seven of his major pieces of work including most of Under Milk Wood.
The Boat House has been sensitively converted into the museum of his life and work by Carmarthen District Council and includes audio and visual presentations, original writings, a charming period tea room, an art gallery and a themed bookshop.
The Museum is now acclaimed worldwide as a National Welsh Heritage attraction.
Laugharne retains the quaint atmosphere and street scenes which have attracted numerous writers over the years and has special ‘town scheme’ status within Wales and stringent conservation measures are in force.
Restaurants, antique and craft shops can be found in and around the township and in addition to the Castle currently undergoing environmental works, visitors are intrigued by the thriving ancient Corporation with its Portreeve, Jury and Common Attorney etc. which retains with pride local customs dating back to its 13th Century Charter.
The world famous Dylan Thomas Boathouse Museum, Laugharne
the coast
This is a beautiful 25 mile stretch and brings together a wonderful combination of quaint seaside villages and the lively bustling holiday village of Pendine.
Pendine Sands stretch to some 8 miles and are world famous for past attempts at land speed records by Sir Malcolm Campbell and others.
Today, it is best remembered, perhaps, for the fatal crash of Parry Thomas in 1927 in his motorcar ‘Babs’.
Bathing is particularly recommended at Pendine, which is continually monitored to E.E.C.
standards.
Offering a contrast are the villages of Ferryside, Llansteffan and, of course, Laugharne — which is specifically referred to elsewhere.
Ferryside enjoys delightful views across the Towy Estuary and the local community is justifiably proud of its rich and varied past.
here, there is also a flourishing Yacht Club.
Llansteffan is rich in scenery and architecture and is a designated conservation area.
Bathing is recommended at ‘Scott's Bay’ and like Ferryside there are varied picturesque walks.
Llansteffan Castle is freely open to the public and enjoys magnificent views over the estuary.
Taking Laugharne, Llansteffan and Ferryside in context, that not so distant dream of typically quaint and charming Welsh seaside villages is complete.
Sunset over Ferryside and Llansteffan
Magnificent Pendine Sands
history
Reference is made elsewhere to the 3 excellent Museums, and in addition there is ‘Y Gangell’ situated near Cynwyl Elfed which is the home and birthplace of Dr Elfed Lewis, Archdruid and Hymnologist.
The Interpretive Gardens and Centre at Whitland have been created as a tribute to Hywel Dda, who established a legal code following a great assembly at Whitland around 940 A.D. The new unified code has continued to influence modern day legal systems.
Carmarthen Bay & Teifi Valley is rich in stone age relics and at Coygen Cave, between Laugharne and Pendine, is one of the most important finds in Wales.
Excavations have uncovered positive proof that between 10,000 and 25,000 years ago it was a wild beast's den with bones of extinct animals having been found in the stalagmites on the cave floor.
On the Pembrokeshire border lies Efailwen, a small village where the Rebecca riots began when a toll gate was burned in 1839.
This was a classic example of a ‘people's revolt’.
Castles can be explored at Llansteffan and Newcastle Emlyn in particular although a fine Castle gateway and some exposed walls can be seen at Carmarthen, with Laugharne Castle currently closed for environmental works.
Llansteffan Castle is of Norman construction and overlooks the Towy Estuary making the walk thoroughly rewarding.
It dates back to the 13th century.
Newcastle Emlyn Castle was built in approximately 1240 within a loop on the River Teifi and it saw action in 1648 when it was blown up by Cromwell's men.
Laugharne Castle dates back to the 12th century and Carmarthen Castle to 1109, restored some 200 years later by Edward I at a cost of £169 15s. 6d!
Laugharne Castle
The Hywel Dda Interpretative Centre, Whitland
Llansteffan Castle
Further Information
Carmarthen Bay & Teifi Valley really is an ideal touring base, being central to the whole of West Wales and indeed the Brecon Beacons, Swansea and Gower areas.
Full Intercity rail services are available, with London a mere 3½ hours away.
The M4 motorway reaches the district, with Bristol 1¾ hours, Cardiff 1¼ hours and Swansea 35–40 minutes away, making that day visit very easy and manageable too!
Carmarthen District Council funds Tourist Information Centres at the following locations:
Carmarthen, Lammas Street — seasonal (0267) 231557.
Newcastle Emlyn, Market Hall — seasonal (0239 711333.
Pont Abraham Services, western end of M4 — open all year (0792) 883838.
This brochure is only intended as a very brief introduction to Carmarthen Bay & Teifi Valley.
The main colour holiday guide with full accommodation details is available free at T.I.C.
's in Wales, or by contacting:
The Spectacular Teifi Valley