

Acknowledgements
This report has been compiled by members of the West Belfast Economic Forum — the name assumed by the organisers of the ‘Is West Belfast Working?’
Conference under which they will carry out the work which conference participants resolved that they should.
The founding groups are listed below.
The Forum would like to take this opportunity to thank those who provided financial support for the conference: The Andersonstown News, the National Union of Public Employees, Tim Davis of the Northern Ireland Voluntary Trust and David Bass of Milltown Action Team whose help has also made possible the publication of this report.
Jane Craven and staff of Whiterock College of Further Education were especially helpful in arranging creche provision and ensuring the conference ran well on the day.
Our thanks also to the College's Drama Group.
Many people have assisted in producing this report but we would especially like to thank Dave Maley of Falls Community Council for typesetting and designing the report.
Founding Groups of the WEST BELFAST ECONOMIC FORUM
Blackwater Media Workshop
Centre for Research and Documentation
Fair Employment Trust
Falls Community Council
Lower Lenadoon Housing Action Group
National Union of Public Employees
Natwest
Obair, the Campaign for Employment in West Belfast
Springhill Community House
Tenants Participation Advisory Service
Upper Springfield Resource Centre
West Belfast Action for the Unemployed
Introduction
Early in 1990 a group of people involved in various community organisations in West Belfast met informally to discuss the economic problems of the area.
There was general agreement that current initiatives to meet those problems were ineffective, that there was little consultation with the people of West Belfast and that frequently they amounted to little more than cosmetic exercises.
Eventually it was agreed to throw the debate open to a wider audience and thus was born the idea of the ‘Is West Belfast Working?’
Conference which took place on Saturday, 2nd June 1990 at Rupert Stanley College, Whiterock Road, Belfast.
This is the report of that conference.
Reflecting the pattern of the conference, our report contains the contributions of the invited speakers, of the subsequent discussions in the workshops where particular issues were dealt with in depth, and finally the general debate in the afternoon which was open to everyone present.
It is a tribute to all involved that the debate was conducted in an honest, open and disciplined way.
We thank all those who attended the conference.
Our report, which is essentially a record of what was discussed at the conference, gives them, and those unable to attend, an opportunity to reconsider the issues involved.
Furthermore, it raises yet again the economic and political implications which too frequently take second place to other matters but which are of the greatest importance for West Belfast.
We also believe that many of the findings are in principle relevant to other areas in Northern Ireland.
The Conference participants unanimously passed a resolution that the group's work should continue.
The ‘Is West Belfast Working?’
Conference Group has chosen to call itself the West Belfast Economic Forum.
Successful though the conference was, it merely represented a beginning of the Forum's work.
As appears from the following pages many people worked hard to make that success, and some are mentioned in the report itself — see also the Acknowledgements.
Much of the office and administrative work both for the conference and for this report was carried out by Falls Community Council for which we are particularly grateful.
Kevin Delaney, Honorary Secretary.
SECTION ONE
SPEECHES
Opening Remarks
Bill Rolston
I am a member of the organising committee for this conference.
I am also a member of Obair, the Campaign for Employment in West Belfast.
Obair has been active on the question of employment, unemployment and training for people in West Belfast since 1987.
During that time, and especially since the publication of The Obair Report in December 1988, we have come into contact with many other groups and individuals who share our concerns about government policies in the area.
The range of concerned groups and individuals is wide — community activists, paid community workers and advice workers, academics, elected politicians, managers of and workers in employment, training and educational programmes, and people at the receiving end of those programmes.
While these groups and individuals may not always have shared our analysis, they were asking the same questions about the link between government claims and reality in relation to job creation and training in West Belfast.
The fundamental question proved to be this: can the job creation and training schemes for West Belfast succeed in turning round the economic marginalisation and discrimination which the area has traditionally experienced?
Earlier this year we began to meet with three other West Belfast groups with the view of jointly organising a conference on these issues.
These groups were Springhill Community House, West Belfast Action for the Unemployed and the Falls Community Council.
Later we were joined in an organising committee by a number of other people who, although acting in a personal capacity, had through their paid employment or voluntary work direct experience of the issues which were to form the core of the conference.
As the organising committee we set three objectives for this conference.
They are:
1.
to examine current government policies for their impact on job prospects and training for people in West Belfast;
2.
to evaluate the long-term benefits of the policies for local people;
3.
to identify existing and potential local initiatives for economic development in West Belfast.
In addition we hope that the conference proves to be the beginning rather than the end of a process — that it can begin to provide a mechanism which we believe is sorely missing from current schemes, namely, popular accountability.
In this vein we are seeking a mandate from you to continue after this conference in the task of monitoring government employment and training policies in the area, encouraging open debate on these policies, and publicising our findings.
You will hear more of this in the last half hour of the conference.
But you have much to ensure before that!
The first session, after I have finished speaking, will involve 12 speakers addressing you on the theme of the conference, each from his or her specific perspective.
We are very grateful to the representatives of the following groups for agreeing to speak:
Springhill Community House,
Milltown Action Team,
Joint Shop Stewards Committee at Royal Victoria Hospital,
Fair Employment Commission,
Worknet,
Northern Ireland Association of Community Workshops,
Equal Opportunities Commission,
Northern Ireland Council on Disability
Falls Community Council,
Phoenix West Belfast Development Trust
West Belfast Action for the Unemployed and
Obair.
There are some prominent absences in that list.
We invited David Fell, Permanent Secretary of the DED, who has ultimate responsibility for the IDB and LEDU, and Julian Crozier, Chief Executive of the Training and Employment Agency, to attend.
The reason for those invitations should be clear.
The NIO claims that the IDB created 1,278 jobs in or adjacent to the Belfast Action Team Areas in 1988/9 — that LEDU created 710 jobs in the Action Areas in the same year — that Job Clubs and Job Markets placed 2,000 people in employment and training between April and December 1989.
We believed that people at the conference would want to examine the validity of those claims and that official government representation would therefore be valuable.
Unfortunately David Fell replied saying that he and Julian Crozier were unable to come.
We also invited Irvine Devitt of the IFI.
Again the reason should be obvious.
In 1989 the IFI committed £2,250,000 to the West Belfast Enterprise Board for the Howard Street mill development, and £1,650,000 to Dairy Farm Community Enterprises.
We believed this conference would benefit from the IFI's explanation of the criteria by which those projects were chosen and those amounts allocated.
Regrettably Irvine Devitt replied that he could not attend.
Fr.
Matt Wallace of Cathedral Community Enterprises was also invited.
As a major sponsor of ACE jobs in the area and a member of the management committees of various other projects, we felt his contribution would be valuable.
Fr.
Wallace did not reply to our letters and telephone calls.
Each of the 12 speakers who accepted our invitation to be here has been told that they have seven minutes to address the conference.
It is absolutely essential for the smooth running of the rest of the day that they keep to this limit.
Consequently I would ask them and you the audience to be tolerant if I am ruthless in preventing anyone exceeding the limit.
After the opening session we have a series of workshops.
These are regarded as essential preparation for the main plenary session this afternoon.
They provide an opportunity for each participant to voice their opinions on a wide range of issues.
The two and a half hour plenary session this afternoon will provide a forum to bring the insights of the workshops to everyone at the conference and to make practical suggestions for the way forward.
The person with the unenviable task of chairing the plenary session is Inez McCormack, who has also been a member of the conference organising committee.
Two last points: firstly, during lunch you will have the chance to enjoy a play presented by a drama group from this college.
Finally, we would like to thank Jane Craven of Whiterock College for her support in staging this conference at such an appropriate venue.
And we would like to thank the following organisations for financial support: Andersonstown News, and Milltown Action Team.
And so, to our speakers.
Springhill Community House is well known in the area, both for its own work and its connections with the Conway Mill.
The Mill has been vetted in an attempt to marginalise it and its excellent work.
We agreed to symbolically reverse that marginalisation by asking Springhill Community House to speak first.
Marie McKnight, who prepared their submission, cannot be here and has delegated OLIVER KEARNEY to present it for her.
Springhill Community House
Oliver Kearney
Is West Belfast really Working?
Has West Belfast ‘got the buzz?’
I feel that the way one answers that question depends very much on one's perspective.
There is little doubt that all the outward signs of growth and development are present.
New, well-constructed houses are springing up all over West Belfast on every available piece of waste ground or green patch.
In the local press we read ever more frequently about another ‘new’ initiative to create jobs, or yet another new building, specially designed to house purpose-built work units.
We have state-of-the-art shopping developments right on the edge of West Belfast and the promise of jobs for the long-term unemployed.
But what is the reality behind this optimistic picture?
Yes, we do have an abundance of new houses, some of which are beautifully constructed, with large kitchens and gardens — but with one of the worst unemployment records in Western Europe.
The few jobs that are available are so poorly paid that the few who are offered such employment cannot afford to take it as they wouldn't be able to afford the rent on their new homes.
The result — we have beautiful new homes and centrally heated redundancy!
We also have the Castle Court development, complete with massive subsidies from the British government, which was built on the backs of the Smithfield traders, some of whom had been there for fifty years and whose original conception of a shopping complex run by local people was hijacked.
We have had the Debenham's Retail Training Scheme and promises of employment for the long-term unemployed, which for the most part haven't materialised.
In addition we have an abundance of ‘work units’ springing up all over West Belfast operating under the control of the Catholic Church with the backing of bodies like the International Fund for Ireland.
But for whom is Belfast working?
In a recent article in the Irish Times, referring to the ‘job creation’ units set up by the Catholic Church, the paper hailed the clergy with the headline, ‘Priests take on Provos for the People's hearts’.
That this is the nub of the British governments' sudden concern for the long-term unemployed in West Belfast is in little doubt among community activists.
But this policy extend well beyond the IRA and strikes right at the heart of independent community organisations who are interested in seeing the people of the area take control of all aspects of their own lives, including their own work, wealth and education.
So in the midst of all this apparent optimism we have independent community initiatives, run by people who live in the community, groups who are trying to provide work, wealth, education, advice and community support — groups which are under fierce attack for so doing!
Groups which have been labelled as ‘subversives’ or ‘paramilitary fronts’.
It was because of these attacks that a Public Enquiry into the issue of political vetting was set up three years ago.
In May 1988 an independent panel of respected jurors was asked to hear the verbal evidence and consider the written submissions of 12 community organisations in the North of Ireland.
The panel of jurors was made up of four highly respected individuals: Norman Shannon (solicitor); Brice Dickson (Committee on the Administration of Justice); Paul Hunt (National Council for Civil Liberties); and John Mitchell (then a senior official of the Irish Distributive and Administrative Trade Union).
In each of the cases heard by the jurors, the excuses for the withdrawal of statutory funding was slightly different.
However, in ten of the twelve cases heard, Douglas Herd's statement of June 1986 was quoted as the reason for the withdrawal of funding.
In this statement to the House of Commons Hurd stated that ‘in the public interest’ funding should be withdrawn from community organisations who might ‘directly or indirectly improve the standing or further the aims of a paramilitary organisation’.
The jurors challenged the Hurd statement on two civil libertarian grounds:
1.
If a project is a genuine community-based initiative creating jobs and providing a service for the community, and if its management and accounts are in order, it is utterly unacceptable that it should not receive funding on the basis of its alleged political associations.
Projects should be considered on their own merit, rather than whether or not they are politically acceptable to the government of the day.
2.
The rules of natural justice were notably absent, particularly in relation to the withdrawal of ACE funding.
Projects thus affected should, for instance, know the ‘evidence’ against them and have a right to answer specific allegations.
All of the groups which submitted evidence to the Enquiry were ‘…community based initiatives’.
All had their accounts in order.
All were publicly accountable.
Specific allegations have never been made against any of these groups.
In other words they are guilty until proven innocent.
The jurors concluded that the government's policy and practice, particularly in relation to ACE funding had, what they termed ‘many powerful and insidious ramifications’.
They went on to highlight ‘three additional repercussions of great importance to civil libertarians’:
1.
people's lives had been put at risk;
2.
valuable, independent community initiatives had been undermined;
3.
public debate of important political issues tended to be stifled.
Evidence in this report was gathered from 12 groups and individuals some of whom were prepared to have their names and the names of their organisations go on the record.
Several others, however, including one individual who testified that he had suffered discriminatory treatment from his employers because of views he had expressed in public about the political situation, requested that their names be withheld from the final report, because they felt that their jobs and perhaps even their very lives would be at risk.
We all know the dangers of labelling groups and individuals within the current political climate.
Most community activists in the area would agree that the intent of this hidden agenda is to destroy the initiatives of those who are independent, those who are not under the control of the church or state.
It would seem that the rationale behind this agenda is that ordinary people who make their own decisions, built on their own experience, who create their own pressure groups, their own education and their own work are dangerous and must be marginalised.
So, for whom is Belfast working?— surely there is little hope that West Belfast will ever really work until the ‘hidden agenda’ is acknowledged and changed!
As people in Springhill Community House know from experience the key issue in West Belfast is the provision of employment.
The government claims that it is tackling this issue through its Making Belfast Work programme.
One of the most public aspects of Making Belfast Work is the existence of the Belfast Action Teams.
DAVID BASS, team leader of the Milltown Action Team, is our next speaker.
Milltown Action Team
David Bass
I would like to thank the organisers for inviting me to speak at this conference and to say that I am very pleased to be here.
I am keen to support any initiatives aimed at discussing ways of encouraging the economic regeneration of the area.
I am particularly keen to support one of the conference's aims, which is to identify potential local initiatives for economic development.
It is important as an introduction to put the Belfast Action Teams' role into perspective.
While the Action Teams have a major role to play in implementing local initiatives, they are not working on their own, but rather as part of the overall Making Belfast Work strategy.
One of the Teams' main aims is to reduce unemployment in the area and in this regard the Teams work closely with other government bodies.
These include DED, who are engaged in supporting a range of training initiatives and in supporting agencies such as Worknet, which Liam Parker will be talking about later — LEDU, who have set up a variety of new schemes in addition to their normal support for business within the Belfast Special Action Group area, which includes West Belfast — and, perhaps to a lesser extent, IDB, who have recently held a local Sourcing Exhibition in Andersonstown Leisure Centre aimed at encouraging small local firms to apply for contracts with larger firms and public bodies.
In this talk I want to explore two main themes.
Firstly I want to look at the idea of partnership.
The Action Teams can do little on their own.
They rely on ideas from groups, individuals and companies within their area.
The Teams can assist groups developing and implementing new ideas which will benefit the area, but depend largely on the initiative and drive of local people.
We are particularly looking for entrepreneurs who can set up and develop businesses, thus creating employment in the area.
The Action Teams also work in partnership with the other government departments I have mentioned and numerous other voluntary and statutory bodies.
Without their support and the ideas from the area the Teams can achieve little.
My second main theme is that of flexibility.
The Action Teams have been deliberately set up with a wide brief so that they can adapt to local needs without having to conform to a rigid pattern.
To illustrate this I want to mention briefly a list of ways in which the Milltown Action Team has been able to either increase employment or increase local people's chances of gaining employment.
First we can offer direct support to businesses in the form of loans, loan guarantees or grants, depending on the needs of the firms.
In all cases the Action Team works with LEDU and can sometimes provide support in addition to that which LEDU can provide and in other cases can provide assistance to firms not eligible for LEDU assistance.
Secondly we can assist business support services.
These can include advisory services for businesses — support for local enterprise centres, such as the support given to Work West for its business information service based at the workshop on the Glen Road — enterprise awareness training and exhibitions and support for courses, such as the Women and Enterprise programme run by Work West.
Thirdly we can support training schemes designed to improve the employability of local people and to help them get jobs.
While some training is aimed at specific jobs, some is planned in the hope that jobs will become available and to help make the area more attractive to firms planning to move by having better trained people.
There is a long list of training schemes which Action Teams have assisted, including:
Worknet, where the Action Team provided funding for setting up the Community Employment Agency in Andersonstown;
various ACE schemes, such as St. Teresa's, where the Action Team has funded a conversion of old stables to provide offices and a training and meeting room;
specific training projects, such as the video project at Blackwater Media Workshop in St. Louise's and a desktop publishing project in Falls Community Council;
courses run by the Open Learning Centre and Rupert Stanley College;
basic training, such as subsidised driving lessons;
and various other schemes, such as YTP schemes and customised training schemes.
Another area of work for the Action Teams is in building up links between local schools and work.
We have recently started work with the Industrial Society in this area to help bring industry representatives into schools.
We have also worked on a project involving careers videos and workbooks particularly suitable for Belfast schools.
The Action Team is also interested in breaking down barriers which discourage West Belfast people from working outside the area through work experience, Wider Horizons programmes, etc.
This is particularly important when you realise that only 30% of West Belfast residents who are currently working actually work in West Belfast.
The Action Team is also keen to support community projects involving community businesses.
While it can be a long, slow process, businesses based in the community can have enormous long-term benefits for the area and the Team is therefore anxious to support ideas being worked on by community groups in conjunction with the LEDU community business programme.
Finally the Action Team is keen to support ideas promoting the area with the aim of making the area more attractive to firms setting up.
In conclusion, the Action Teams can help local groups in a wide variety of ways and while some of the ideas may be criticised, they all have some role to play in the economic regeneration of the area.
However, the Teams are always looking for new ideas which they can work on in partnership with local groups and individuals.
It is an irony that as the government makes great claims about its job creation record for West Belfast it is at the same time in the process of running down some major sources of employment in the area, most notably the Royal Victoria Hospital.
BRENDAN McCARTHY of the Joint Shop Stewards Committee at the Royal will now speak.
Joint Shop Stewards Committee, Royal Victoria Hospital
Brendan McCarthy
I am chairman of the joint shop stewards committee in the RVH and also branch secretary of NUPE of north and west Belfast district.
The RVH is one of the major employers in Northern Ireland and has a workforce in the region of 6,000 people.
If an analysis was carried out, you will see that as far as religion is concerned, there is a 50–50 ratio, although 80 of people come from West Belfast itself.
I am pleased to have been asked by Obair to speak today.
* But unfortunately, when you work in the health service, when you hear the government, when you hear groups saying there are new initiatives to get West Belfast to work, to get the unemployed people into jobs, sometimes it makes the hairs on the back of my head stand.
A lot of the times what is really happening is that people are being put into artificial jobs.
There was a big announcement a number of months ago in Derry where a political party said on the headlines of the news about creating 200 jobs in Derry.
The very same week there were 247 women in Altnagelvin hospital who got their redundancy notices.
It doesn't take a brain box to weigh that up — it actually means that 47 people lost their jobs.
ACE schemes are only as good as the people who run them.
I have seen ACE schemes I have seen abuse of them.
I have seen ACE schemes that are doing very good work but are more or less driven out of the place they are in because people didn't like their faces, or for other reasons.
At the minute my own branch is in the middle of a row.
We have facts about a charitable trust using ACE schemes to actually do my members' jobs, do my members' jobs in the home help service, do my members' jobs in the social services — driving people about when they are not insured; they don't have PSV and as far as they're concerned, ‘so what?’
People haven't looked at the directors of certain charitable organisations; well, it has to be looked at.
The charitable organisation, the trust I am talking about happens to have four Eastern Board managers running the show.
So that in itself would make people stop and think that they are going to take work away from health service and social service workers.
That's what I mean by artificial jobs.
I would like certainly to see schemes starting where people can be put into worthwhile jobs, where people can start jobs knowing at the end of it that they are not going to be thrown onto the dole queue again.
I have seen in my own area where wee lads who were on the border line of going one way or another regarding life in Northern Ireland, ending up getting jobs and doing great for a year and at the end of the year just thrown back onto the dole and people have lost interest in them again.
I would rather see people that are going to start work, even if it is only for a year, at the same time where they are working that year that somebody take an interest in what's going to happen  to them at the end of that year.
That's why I say one of the most important things about these schemes is the people who run the schemes.
The people who employ me, the Eastern Health and Social Services Board and the government, in the past have called us in the RVH, and now it all depends who they are talking to — if they are talking to the American delegation we are Marxist revolutionaries and if they are talking to other delegations they have branded us as Provos.
We have come through those stupid remarks by responsible people.
We have come through it to the extent that I am north and west Belfast Branch Secretary.
Right across the divide we have Protestant and Catholic shop stewards and we certainly, at our shop stewards committee, aren't scared to debate any aspect of life in Northern Ireland and nobody takes the hump what one steward says or another steward says.
It is sensibly debated and a sensible solution is come to.
As far as I am concerned I wish Obair well in the way forward.
I certainly hope they don't get into the ball game of letting any political party or any grouping take over.
I hope they do what they set out to do for the sake of the people of West Belfast.
At the same time, I would warn Obair*, the same as I would warn anybody setting up a scheme, to make sure that the scheme is properly run, to make sure that the scheme isn't used to take jobs away from either the domestics, the home helps or any other jobs in the health service — make sure that abuse is taken away and I certainly wish them luck in the future and I thank you for inviting me here to speak.
* Editorial note: Obair was just one of the organising groups.
Photograph by The News Letter
Crucial to the question of job creation is the issue of fair employment.
Recently the government has revamped its fair employment legislation, and one of the aims of this conference is to examine the value of that legislation for the people of West Belfast.
BOB COOPER, Chair of the Fair Employment Commission will speak next.
Fair Employment Commission
Bob Cooper
The Fair Employment Act 1976 had as its main feature an attempt to deal with direct religious discrimination.
It did not outlaw indirect discrimination and indeed the concept of indirect discrimination did not appear in the legislation.
It did, however, provide that the Agency, through investigation, could help to ensure that employers promoted equality of opportunity in employment but it did not provide that employers had a duty themselves to promote equality of opportunity in employment.
It relied substantially on a voluntary approach.
Experience, however, showed that employers have many priorities — such as making a profit, obtaining orders, producing orders at the right price — and that something which they are not compelled to do, particularly in circumstances where the economic climate is adverse, goes well down the list of priorities.
The fundamental change in the 1989 Fair Employment Act is that indirect discrimination is outlawed and, more important still, employers have now an obligation, by monitoring and analysing the labour force, to do something about inequality.
Most traditional employment practices, such as word-of-mouth recruitment, the use of unsolicited applications, preferences for friends and relations of existing employees and preferences for seniority, are practices which favour the ‘haves’ and disadvantage the ‘have nots’.
They are practices which ensure that those who have the advantage of a network of friends and relations in secure employment will have a better chance of obtaining jobs than those who have a network of friends and relations who have suffered long-term unemployment.
They therefore advantage other parts of Belfast over West Belfast.
They are what is meant by indirect discrimination.
The removal of such practices, and any employer who uses such practices today does so at his peril, can be a part of the answer to the economic problems of West Belfast which lie at the root of most other West Belfast problems.
The Fair Employment Commission was set up because of the disadvantage experienced by Northern Ireland Catholics in terms of greatly higher unemployment rates, lower participation rates in the more prestigious better-paid jobs and much greater participation in insecure or poorly paid jobs.
The major target which the Commission has set itself is to bring about a situation where Protestant and Catholic levels of employment and unemployment are more nearly equal.
Many people, particularly in the Protestant community, consider that there is a conflict between the Commission's assumption of a target which involves improving the employment position of Catholics and its duty, as they see it, to be neutral between the Protestant and Catholic communities.
I said earlier that indirectly discriminatory practices, which are the main target of the new legislation, favour the ‘haves’ against the ‘have nots’.
While it is true that the majority of the ‘have nots’ in terms of employment are Catholics, not all are.
For example, in Protestant West Belfast government figures showed that when unemployment for males in Northern Ireland was approximately 20%, male unemployment in Protestant West Belfast was 35%, while male unemployment in Catholic West Belfast was 47%.
West Belfast Protestants, while suffering less than their Catholic counterparts, did much worse than Protestants in other areas.
If the legislation could only help Catholics, West Belfast Protestants who too lack a supporting network of friends and relations able to assist them in obtaining well-paid employment, could complain.
They too, however, will benefit from the outlawing of all those practices which are indirectly discriminatory and which benefit the ‘haves’ against the ‘have nots’.
The conflict which some people see between the Commission's role in attempting to improve the economic position of Catholics and its neutrality between Protestants and Catholicism is more apparent than real.
The Commission must be on the side of the under-privileged in employment.
Most of those will be Catholic, but not all.
The ‘have nots’ in the Shankill as well as the ‘have nots ’in the Falls must benefit.
There need not therefore be a conflict of interests between the ‘have nots’ in each community.
The outlawing of indirect discrimination, the requirement that employers analyse their labour force, the requirement that they operate proper employment procedures where necessary should benefit all the people of West Belfast.
Any measures which improve the job prospects for unemployed West Belfast Catholics will also improve the job prospects for unemployed West Belfast Protestants.
An essential element in job creation is the provision of training for school leavers and retraining for the long term unemployed.
The government's Job Training Programme seeks to tackle the latter.
West Belfast's Job Training Programme is managed by Worknet, an agency which also runs four Job Clubs, an enterprise training programme called Your Business Opportunity, and most recently the community employment agency.
The Chief Executive of Worknet LIAM PARKER will speak next.
Worknet
Liam Parker
Let me tell you who Worknet are.
Worknet is the trading name of the Falls Development Agency Ltd, which was incorporated as a company limited by guarantee in October 1988.
Its articles and memorandum state that the overall objective for the company is to exploit for the community of West Belfast job finding and job training techniques.
The main reason behind the establishment of the Falls Development Agency was to assist the community of West Belfast to obtain employment and training in jobs and skills which were available.
Local enterprise agencies, the West Belfast Enterprise Board, LEDU and IDB, were all participating in the creation of an infrastructure to attract firms to the area, but no organisation was working with and for the adult community in West Belfast.
Community workshops were doing good work with the under-eighteens, but it was felt that an adult employment and training agency was an important need.
The members of the Board felt that a community approach was essential and hoped that our work with the community would complement the work being carried out by the above and other organisations in the area.
The group of people who form the membership of the company were drawn together to assist in achieving the above objectives with whatever professional expertise and personal knowledge they had at their command.
Financial assistance and good advice was sought from the local Belfast Action Team in the Lower Falls/Lower Shankill area who willingly and readily helped the organisation to find its feet.
The first method of tackling the problem was to open a Job Club in Lower Clonard Street.
A Job Club is a three week course for unemployed people where they learn techniques of job hunting, curriculum vitae preparation, and interview techniques, and are supplied with free stamps and free telephone calls during their time in the Job Club.
Seventy per cent of our Job Club members achieve employment.
There are now four Job Clubs organised by Worknet in West Belfast, our original in Lower Clonard Street, one located beside our headquarters in Divis Street, one in Turf Lodge and the one mentioned above in Andersonstown Road.
We also manage the Job Training Programme in West Belfast.
This is a scheme whereby unemployed people who require to learn new skills or brush up former skills are placed with an employer for an agreed period of time to achieve those skills.
A second training scheme is Training Links, which is a six to ten week course to assist adults to return to the labour market by working on their personal effectiveness, usually through the medium of brushing up their writing skills, using confidence building techniques and computer skills.
All of the above programmes are achieved through agreement or contracts with the Training and Employment Agency.
In 1989, through a partnership programme with Enterprise Ulster, a West Belfast business and community directory was produced and distributed throughout West Belfast and to other interested organisations.
Also late in 1989 LEDU awarded Worknet a contract to assist people in West Belfast who had a business or self-employment idea to take their ideas forward and develop small businesses within the community.
Development has been swift and Worknet now has a staff of twenty eight people, all of whom are dedicated to assisting the community in their search for employment or training.
Worknet sees itself as an employment and training facilitator and provider, an organisation which with the support of the community within which it operates, works on the skills of the individual within the community.
We try to run a commercially oriented operation, but the profit is purely a method of ensuring that we can continue in existence for many years to come.
Worknet is the product of a growing awareness that within this community these are things which can be achieved by a well organised, well targeted voluntary organisation which seeks to assist in the creation of employment.
We are distinct from but in partnership with the public sector.
The partnership is that the public sector provides funding — on a contracted, targeted basis — but the voluntary group provides the policy, the strategy design, the management skills and administration of the initiative.
We are distinct from the private sector because any profit generated is used to fund new initiatives in West Belfast.
We have a further distinction from the private sector in that we have a prior commitment.
We are not in business to make a profit; we are in business to run a quality programme which puts the needs of our clients as our first priority.
The paradox is that as Worknet expands another institution responsible for training faces possible annihilation.
The community workshops are under threat from new government arrangements for funding.
Our next speaker has experience of that threat from the perspective of one community workshop, Glenand; he is LIAM McCARNEY.
Youth and Community Workshop
Liam McCarney
Glenand Workshop: Background
Glenand was set up almost eleven years ago on the initiative of a group of local people to service the community, to provide jobs for local people and to provide training for young people in the Andersonstown and Glen Road areas (hence the name — Glen And).
Over the years numerous government directives have gradually eroded the community element until we became what was essentially a Government Training Centre — except that our staff were paid about £2,000 per year less than staff in GTCs.
Our contacts with the local community have almost completely disappeared.
The Company Directors/Committee members, all of whom give their time voluntarily with no remuneration of any kind, resented these changes.
Many felt that the Committee members were merely providing a rubber stamp for Government decisions.
However, they went along with the many changes in the hope that the increasing emphasis on training might help our young people to find jobs.
To further the necessary changes within the workshop we appointed an education officer and an industrial liaison officer.
Sections which were not being productive (in terms of trainees finding jobs afterwards) were closed and new sections opened.
Committee members who were responsible for setting Glenand up to promote jobs were extremely reluctant to make people redundant.
However the appointment of staff to fill the new posts meant that our overall complement was little changed and consciences were salved.
The staff responded tremendously and prospects looked good for the future.
Client Group
As a general rule those young people who join the YTP will be the 11+ failures whose career at secondary school continued to be unsuccessful and who left school with little or no qualifications.
They tend to fall into two broad groups:
a.
those who have accepted the teachers' view of them that they are thick and who see no point in pursuing any further academic work because of their acknowledged inability, and
b.
those who see teachers and school as largely irrelevant and who see no value in pursuing academic work.
One of the principle reasons for the development of anti-school attitudes amongst these young people is the separation and ranking of students according to a multiple set of criteria which make up the normative, academically oriented value system of the school.
In my day we had the As as the top stream; the Bs and Cs were the mid-range; the Es were ESN and the Ds were the dustbin men who roamed the yard after break and lunch times collecting empty milk bottles and rubbish.
We have few secondary schools such as I used to teach in nowadays.
Most schools are ‘High Schools’ or ‘Colleges’.
The non-academic streams tend to have fancy names whereas in my day they were the D and E streams, and most schools make an effort to provide a specialised curriculum.
However, the children still know their place in the hierarchy with unerring accuracy and we still fail to get through to too many of them.
One of the biggest problems in working with these young people is overcoming their anti-school attitudes and convincing the former that they do have the ability and the latter that education is essential if they are to make a success of life.
This is a difficult task for skilled teachers.
Our supervisors are skilled tradesmen who are being forced more and more into a teaching role without any kind of recompense for it.
However, as I said, our staff responded tremendously and attempted to meet all our demands.
The Aim of YTP
The primary aim of the Youth Training Programme has always been to provide training with a strong emphasis on the application of skills.
It is quite clear that the present government's approach to training is market-led.
If training is to meet the demands of the market place then training and training provision must change as the demand changes.
The present government also believes in privatisation.
And this, basically, is what block funding is all about — the government intends to privatise the workshops.
Their main emphasis will be on viability and profitability.
Just like any other business, the workshops will have to make a profit.
To ensure that they do, block funding is not intended to cover the full running costs.
Block Funding
Under block funding trainees will be divided into five categories or premium levels.
The following are the current rates.
1.
Basic: a basic grant of £2,400 for each trainee who is simply unemployed.
2.
Premium 1: £5,300 for each young person suffering from physical or mental handicap.
3.
Premium 2: £5,100 for trainees with learning difficulties.
4.
Premium 3: £2,900 for trainees classified as ‘semiskilled’.
5.
Premium 4: £5,900 for skilled apprentices.
A Source of Profit?
The first thing I would point to is that our training costs for last year averaged out at £5,100 per trainee.
So, if we get trainees graded in the Basic or Premium 3 grades, we will run at a substantial loss.
How does the government intend that we survive?
The plan is that all second year trainees will be placed within employers.
We will have about £100 per week for their training needs.
A proportion of this will be paid to the employer.
We will then do a deal with the employer to release the trainee back to us one day per week for training.
This is where we are to make our profit.
We pay the employer as little as possible to take the trainee in the first place and then charge him as much as possible to train the trainee on his behalf.
This, the government believes, will be a very lucrative source of income.
Flawed Thinking
I would contend that government thinking is flawed in a number of areas.
Firstly, government officials had not gone into the implications for management committees.
Management committees are composed of people drawn from the local community.
In most cases these people will have no training in the financial or legal implications of running a business for profit.
Indeed their interests lie in assisting young people to make their way in the world and they have no interest or desire to become business entrepreneurs.
Under block funding workshops must make a profit.
If they make a loss, management committees could be held liable personally under insolvency regulations for any such losses.
While this was always true, it was unlikely that committee members would be held personally liable while the government was underwriting the costs.
The government's starting point with regard to block funding was that they would not provide a safety net.
The original proposal was for no guaranteed funding and payment to be in arrears.
They were also offering lower grants for Premia 1 and 2.
Heavy Burden on Glenand
For Glenand in particular the situation was graver than for most.
Because we are a big workshop, our losses would be big.
Over the past year our average number of trainees in the workshop has been 106.
Since we were staffed for a complement of 135 trainees, our first move would have to be to make staff redundant.
A staff of 27 would need to be cut to 17.
Even with such a drastic cut, we estimated our losses for the first year as being in the region of £148,000.
Through the Northern Ireland Association of Community Workshops we sought the advice of senior counsel.
His advice was that for the committee to continue trading knowing in advance that we would be running at a loss would leave members open to a charge of wrongful trading.
The committee decided to close the workshop.
Mr. Needham's Concessions
As you are aware, the Minister, Mr. Needham, subsequently offered concessions.
We would be guaranteed 90% of our 1989/90 budget; we would receive three months funding in advance and not in arrears as originally proposed; we would receive higher rates for Premia levels 1 and 2.
We felt that this new improved offer would enable us to continue in the short term notwithstanding the fact that we still estimated our losses under the new proposals at something in the region of £67,000.
Divisive Approach
But the most worrying thing about this approach remains.
It is divisive.
The ranking system at school means many young people leave school with strong anti-school attitudes.
While schools are attempting to get away from the system, we are formalising it by offering five different levels of funding.
Firstly it is wrong and secondly it is extremely difficult to implement.
The Department told us it would have to be done ‘objectively’ by the careers service; the careers service tell us that a) they don't know what is required of them and b) they haven't got the manpower to do it anyway.
So we are attempting to do it ourselves.
No one is clear yet as to how exactly it will work out.
Paucity of Employers
Secondly the plan to place second year trainees with employers is fine if we can find employers to do deals with.
And that's the nub.
In areas like West Belfast it will be extremely difficult to find employers who are prepared to take trainees and who are also prepared to cooperate in their training needs.
We will need to place 60–70 young people per year — and that is just Glenand.
Finding those places is essential if we are to turn round our large potential deficit.
And there are other problems.
If we do make a profit, we may lose our charitable status.
If we make sufficient profit, we might also become subject to VAT.
After this year if the government no longer underwrite losses, will banks be willing to provide overdraft facilities?
These are the kind of dilemmas which face workshops generally.
There are no easy answers.
Demographic Trends
Demographic trends mean that by 1994 the number of 16 to 19 year olds will have dropped by about one quarter.
Adolescents will find that their market value is rising.
We must provide them with something to sell.
We must have one over-riding goal for the 1990s, that is to convert low skills and low expectations to high skills and high expectations.
I do not believe that the training credits or voucher system being piloted in England will work.
I cannot see how young people who have failed to learn anything in four years will suddenly become sophisticated consumers of education and buy training wisely.
I believe the luncheon voucher approach is misguided.
Nor do I believe that private sector training is the answer.
I believe it is flawed for two reasons.
Firstly the training tends to be too narrow and secondly profit is the primary goal.
Who Should be the Trainers?
No training can be perfect.
I believe that the Youth Training Programme could be amongst the best.
We have a lot of expertise.
We have a lot of people prepared to give of their time voluntarily to help young people get the kind of training they require and to help them find jobs.
We are prepared to give block funding a try, but we are asking for further changes.
West Belfast should be treated as a special case and a uniform grant at the Premium 3 level given for all trainees; alternative solutions must be found where it is simply not possible to find employers to take second year trainees; cover should be given to management committees to protect them from personal liability in the event of insolvency.
The Department Achieved its Objective?
It may well be that the Department has achieved what they set out to achieve.
We, at least, are a leaner and, I hope, a healthier organisation because of the changes we were forced to bring about in the workshop.
Sir John Harvey-Jones is fond of saying that there is no such thing as a business standing still.
The business is either going forward or going backward because everyone else is going forward.
We believe that we have charted a way forward which will secure our future.
We can provide the kind of training necessary for the 1990s, but we need the government working with us and not against us.
We have a lot of expertise in training.
We should be allowed to get on with the training and leave the generation of profit to those with the necessary expertise.
Photograph by Belfast Exposed
It is often forgotten that trainees have two genders.
A recent report published by the EOC revealed how difficult it is for girls in YTP.
The chair of the EOC MARY CLARKE-GLASS will speak next on the issue of jobs and training for women.
Equal Opportunities Commission
Mary Clarke-Glass
Like the other speakers, I am very pleased to come here today.
I haven't come reluctantly or tried to make excuses.
I actually was very pleased indeed to have the opportunity.
You mentioned the YTP research which was carried out by independent academics on behalf of the EOC and the Manpower Council.
It wasn't just us; we were both concerned about what was happening  to girls in YTP because this conference today is talking about training and employment and so many of the young girls in West Belfast, the girls who are not going on to third level education, go into YTP.
I don't think you will be surprised to learn that that in fact shows a very clear divergence between what was considered to be girls' training and boys' training and the most stark statistic was in relation to who was going into government training centres.
In that particular year when the research was carried out there were 2,000 boys in government training centres and one girl.
I think it has gone up by 900%.
I think there are now nine girls in government training centres.
It just shows what you can do with statistics!
If that is happening in YTP, what is happening when the girls and young women go into the workforce.
Well, their pay is three quarters of men's pay.
They are segregated in three areas, nearly three quarters of them.
Those three areas are: education, welfare and health, where over 18% of women in Northern Ireland are working; this is where we find the women in the RVH; in clerical and related jobs — a quarter of women in Northern Ireland are in that area; and another 23% are in catering, cleaning and hairdressing.
The women there will tell you how all those jobs are defined by low pay in many cases, by low status, by very little opportunity to move into the high grades.
That is what the EOC is about.
We are here to fight for those who are have nots, or do not get as much and have fewer opportunities.
I make no apology or make no bones about being partisan.
We are there to fight for people who are not getting equality, who are in fact 52.4% of the population.
A lot of them are in West Belfast.
How do we do this?
I think you have seen already the EOC's concern expressed about what is happening in things like women's centres.
Look what was threatened and nearly happened to the Falls Women's Centre, and it's not just in West Belfast; the same is happening in Ballybeen on the other side of the city.
When we are talking about the end of privilege and we are talking about the future and training, we must remember that over half the population are hard done by.
The Commission has been in existence for the same length of time as the Fair Employment Agency, since 1976.
We are a robust Commission.
We say so in our annual report.
I think Americans and Russians find it strange that we are 100% funded by government and over 50% of the cases we bring are against government departments.
We bring the cases on behalf of women and a number of men who, because of traditional views, because of the way the society has grown in Northern Ireland, because of the segregation of the workforce, are suffering either direct, or more likely indirect discrimination.
We have had a number of cases coming out of West Belfast.
95% of complaints are actually dealt with outside the courts; 5% of cases get into the courts.
We had one particularly bad sexual harassment case which came out of West Belfast a couple of years ago, which I think was a landmark in the recognition by the courts that women cannot be treated with indignity and in the way that that girl was treated.
We have at the moment probably one of our most important cases in the RVH, so I was pleased to listen to the shop steward from NUPE, because it is a case that we are funding and doing with NUPE, and the main person who was in that case is here, Rosaleen Davison.
Do you realise that those four or five women from the RVH have been fighting since 1984 for some sort of fairness and equality in their pay?
We have spent thousands of citizens' tax payers' money on that case and the Eastern Board have spent more than us in defending it.
In the claim we are showing quite clearly, and we have won up to the present stage — six years to show that women's work in the RVH is equal to men's work.
We cannot have a fair society, we cannot have equality, West Belfast cannot be working when the women of West Belfast are treated in that way — and when the women do stand up and fight and say ‘we are not going to put up with this any more’, what happens is they then become threatened by the privatisation of their jobs.
We are at present analysing and looking to see if the effects of privatisation will more adversely affect women than men.
If they do more adversely affect women, our track record in using the legal process that we have, faulty and flawed that it is, might mean that we are in some way able to address the problem.
There are certain things we cannot do but there are certain things we can.
The final thing I want to say is that, standing in this College, I urge you to support the work of the creche which is here in Rupert Stanley.
It does not get proper government support.
It is the only way the women of West Belfast are able to actually able to take on further education and if you can't stand up and fight for that then West Belfast is not working.
People with disabilities also experience severe difficulties in both training and the labour market.
For that reason we have asked LAURA McCARTNEY of the Northern Ireland Council on Disability to speak today.
Northern Ireland Council on Disability (NICD)
Laura McCartney
We have heard something today of how West Belfast is a marginalised area in terms of employment and training, and if that is the case, then disabled people lie on the margin of the margins.
As yet there are no comprehensive and reliable statistics on the employment status of people with disabilities, but the information we have shows disabled people suffering consistently higher levels of unemployment — up to five times higher.
My aim today is to look at government policy on employment and training, and point up some of the issues as they affect people with disabilities.
We could dwell at length on problems of access, ignorance and prejudice and the inequities of the benefit system, but I wold like to focus on two areas — legislation and provision.
Legislation
With the recent Fair Employment legislation the government has missed a golden opportunity to address some of the difficulties faced by disabled people in securing employment.
Equality of opportunity in employment for people with disabilities was featured in the government's appraisal, but was a minor consideration dwarfed by the major political debate on religious affiliation.
Instead, we are left to rely upon the Disabled Persons Employment Acts 1945 and 1960, which established the blue card and quota system whereby employers in the private sector with more than 20 employees must employ at least 3% registered disabled workers.
It does not work.
It will never work.
In Northern Ireland in 1988, while 1105 companies were subject to quota legislation, only 298 met their obligations under the Act.
There have never been prosecutions in Northern Ireland, and in Great Britain there were ten prosecutions between 1944 and 1988, with a total in fines of £334 in the seven successful cases.
The government's approach in persuasion, not enforcement, since enforcement of current legislation is unworkable.
What is needed is anti-discrimination legislation as outlined in NICD's response to the consultative document on Fair Employment.
It is interesting that while the quota system was rejected as a means of providing equality of opportunity for gender and religious affiliation, it was still considered an acceptable and effective means of achieving the same aim for people with disabilities.
This illustrates the perception of disabled people as having different needs and rights than the rest of the population.
Provision
The employment and training provision available in West Belfast and other areas has been outlined by other speakers.
Disabled people tend to be under-represented in mainstream provision whether it be YTP, JTP, ACE or Enterprise Training.
There can be a host of reasons why this is the case, including the physical access, communication difficulties, the suitability of provision, or the absence of appropriate support.
There have been some positive measures introduced such as the extended eligibility of JTP to invalidity benefit claimants, and the expansion of the Sheltered Placement Scheme — but if the perception is wrong, the provision will be wrong.
Disabled people have the capacity and the right to be productive contributors to society but are often perceived as passive recipients of services.
Until the government and the providers of employment and training opportunities accept this fact, equality of opportunity will be hard to achieve.
Conclusion
We do not have the legislation we feel to be necessary nor is the provision adequate to meet all the needs of people with disabilities.
But this is the framework we operate within at present and how we use it is important.
I welcome the opportunity to raise the issues affecting people with disabilities and look forward to sharing ideas in the workshops and discussions to follow, but as it stands, the disabled people of West Belfast are not working.
As a well-established and hard-working organisation in West Belfast the Falls Community Council is in a unique position to comment on the social problems and potential of the area.
STEVIE JOHNSTON of the Falls Community Council and one of the organisers of this conference will now speak.
Falls Community Council
Stevie Johnston
Thomas Hobbes described life as being solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short.
During the last two years we have witnessed many people's lives in West Belfast getting poorer, nastier, more brutal and arguably shorter due to the introduction of the Social Fund, high interest rates and cuts in the health service.
Yet these have also been the first two years of the Making Belfast Work programme, which if we are to believe the glossies, is the answer to structural unemployment of over one third of the workforce in West Belfast, using even the government's definition of being unemployed.
Even if we accept the underlying private enterprise philosophy of Making Belfast Work, some basic flaws exist.
It has ignored the fact that general economic activity limits the potential to develop new businesses, which are often dependent on local markets in the crucial formative years.
The reduction in the cash available for people to spend due to the April 1988 social security changes and the highest interest rates ever (enhanced by the multiplier effect), has had a major effect on the local economy, in reducing demand for locally produced goods and services.
The failure to link the realities of a community dependent on state benefits with the expressed aim of creating an enterprise culture has also affected those who would want to become self-employed.
Those wishing to set up are often afraid that they will lose entitlement to benefit and so not be able to meet their families' basic expenditure.
Guarantees on income and paid benefits advisors would give real assistance to those wanting to become self-employed.
Yet no guarantees exist and funding for trained advice workers is virtually non-existent, this is in the face of 25 enterprise agencies currently working in the area.
What Making Belfast Work has been able to do is draw on the ability of what Mrs. Thatcher would call West Belfast's ‘active citizens’ to develop many of the self-help projects that have characterised the enterprising nature of the community for many years.
While levels of poverty show no sign of falling, the fact that life is financially poor for many does not mean that it has to be solitary, as Mr. Hobbes has suggested.
Making Belfast Work's ability to resource projects quickly with the minimum of red tape and BAT's role in day-to-day agency co-ordination should be applauded.
However even in this sphere we have reservations.
As an agency working in the field of community development, the past two years should have been optimistic ones for Falls Community Council, as new money pumped through BAT has been made available to us and the groups we work for and with.
The reality has been that our core funding, like that of so many other bodies, has been progressively reduced, by City Hall in our case, and we are constantly threatened with having our funding removed entirely, the premise being that BAT will pick up the bill.
Even if BAT do pick up the bill, as they have for East Belfast Community Council and the Centre for Neighbourhood Development, they can offer only 2 to 3 years project funding or finance for capital projects.
This means groups cannot plan in the medium and long term, creating uncertainty and apathy amongst staff on limited contracts.
What will happen to BAT  post-Making Belfast Work?
Mr. Needham's answer to Terry Carlin at the Making Belfast Work conference of May 1989 that BAT would exist as long as Belfast's problems exist, is conspicuous by its absence from the TSB's report of the conference published in its Economic Review of July 1989.
The accountability of BAT also needs addressed.
Those putting forward a project which is turned down have no appeal.
They may be unwilling to criticise the decision for fear that future projects will be jeopardised.
The situation is further worsened as BAT acts as a conduit to many other sources of statutory funding.
The position of BAT leaders as assessors, funders and evaluators of projects and their role as the key link to other sectors of government may make for administrative efficiency.
However such power and influence should have been balanced by checks built in to protect those falling foul of an individual BAT leader.
The lack of accountability in BAT extends generally to the whole process of Making Belfast Work and the government's failure to provide real jobs in West Belfast.
Those who criticise the process are automatically deemed to be supporters of republican politics.
Given the very real threat of political vetting, many in the community think it is better to say nothing than risk the wrath of government.
This self-censorship makes effective consultation and accountability impossible.
The shallowness of the government's commitment to consultation can be seen in the approach being taken towards Springvale, the flagship of Making Belfast Work.
The government has for some time known that this site would be available, yet from the announcement of the project to the Minister's stated deadline for consultation is 8 months, including the summer months.
When faced with proposals which offer ‘a reorientation of communications cutting across traditional routes and boundaries’, which in English means building roads over people's houses, and that routes for these roads are represented by a squiggle from a felt tip pen, which then is incorporated as the project logo, we must begin to wonder if the DED and DOE are poking fun at the communities likely to suffer.
The people of West Belfast have endured the planning disasters of Divis, Moyard etc.
Surely they deserve better than this.
The failure to develop a comprehensive local plan for West Belfast, as called for during the discussions of the Belfast Urban Area Plan, into which Springvale could have fitted, reflects the total ad  hoc-ery of the approach to developing West Belfast.
Making Belfast Work as a super lateral tier of government employed to carry out programmes appears to run over and above the long-term development plans of individual government departments.
Not only does this result in uncertainty about the future of projects funded through Making Belfast Work but it also creates inter-departmental friction and runs counter to the findings of the government scrutiny report of funding of voluntary agencies, which said funding should be tied to departmental objectives.
At best Making Belfast Work has provided the infrastructure, albeit unaccountable, to let those wanting small starter units to get a chance to carry out their business ideas.
It has allowed some local groups to establish new, participative, accountable projects and provided unemployed Arts and Humanities graduates with a chance at a job.
At worst it has unjustly built expectations of a return to mass employment; put money into the pocket of large consultancy firms; served the objectives of narrow sectional interests; undermined physical and administrative planning; substituted ACE and private contract jobs for public sector jobs; been irrelevant to the needs of women; been virtually unaccountable; and invested less than one tenth of the money it took to de-nationalise Shorts and Harlands, even had the programme's money been additional.
If the lives of the people in West Belfast are to become truly richer, more fulfilling and longer, greater resources channelled through a comprehensive strategy are needed to address past deficiencies.
Finally we come to three speakers representing groups which have been active in researching and lobbying on the issues of employment, unemployment and training in West Belfast.
The first speaker is ALISTAIR McDONNELL of Phoenix West Belfast Development Trust.
Phoenix West Belfast Development Trust
Alistair McDonnell
I would like to thank the organisers for inviting me here today.
I think it's important that this type of meeting should be held and indeed many others like it in ever-widening circles.
There have been many things said by earlier speakers and very few of them I disagree with.
I don't see any point in repeating or emphasising to the point of boring you.
But I would like to say to you that in my view, and in the view of the organisation I represent, Phoenix Trust, by and large the time is long past for analysis.
I think the analysis has been done and done and done again.
I think there is a general acceptance even amongst those who are not helpful that there is a major problem here that they cannot ignore or cannot deny and they have even got beyond the stage of trying to blame the victims.
The case is well documented and even official bodies like the Northern Ireland Economic Council would increasingly tend to accept that.
The past approach — for instance, where they analysed statistics in terms of travel-to-work areas and lumped West Belfast and its massive levels of unemployment in with other areas and thereby diluted the whole thing down to 12 or 13% in the Belfast travel-to-work area which extended from Larne to Downpatrick — wasn't helpful.
I would like to attempt to provoke you into asking what can be done with what we've got.
What can we do about the problem?
What can we do to create jobs?
What can we do to create real jobs?
I know some people may not agree with this, but it has been my view over three or four years of struggle that there are in fact substantial elements within the establishment, within government, within the civil service who would like to help.
There are equally substantial elements who don't want to help and there are other elements who are unsure and who are looking for excuses not to help.
There are a couple of themes running through what earlier speakers said.
There are problems with the historical aspects of it.
There is the ever-tightening noose in the last few years of Thatcherism and all its implications.
We can focus on those, and no doubt we will focus on those as time goes by.
My feeling is that while focusing on those we should attempt to focus on a solution as well.
I think we should attempt to focus on what we can do with the scarce resources that are available to us.
Quite simply, I believe that it is necessary to seduce real jobs and real industry into West Belfast by whatever means.
I know that Making Belfast Work has shifted the goal posts on a number of things and jobs have been recycled from A to B. I think it is important to highlight those, but I don't think we should accept small-scale efforts as a solution.
As far as Phoenix is concerned, we would demand that there be separate unemployment statistics, that we get rid of these travel-to-work areas.
They are fine in Cookstown when you are looking at a working population of 8 or 9,000 people, but in Belfast travel-to-work area you are looking at something like 150,000 people and that confuses the well-off and the very impoverished.
I would like to see the likes of West Belfast broken down.
I would like to see unemployment statistics for Andersonstown.
I would like to see them for the Falls.
I would like to see them for the Shankill.
I think it's absolutely essential that West and North, and those bits of North that join West and are equally deprived, like Ardoyne, Oldpark, Duncairn, should be classified as an area of special economic assistance, special IDB support, special funding to ensure that whatever jobs are about when industrialists do appear here from the Koreas, the Japans, the West Germanys and wherever else, that they are taken in here and are told that they would get 10, 15, 20% extra for coming in here.
I think this has worked.
The classification of Derry and Carrickfergus has worked to some extent.
There is a lot of it hype, there is a lot of it window dressing, but by and large it has helped to provide a railway line, if you like, for them to work on and give special help and special aid to various industries that are relocating there.
Another of the things that I would be concerned about is the twin track economic approach, with IDB on the one hand and LEDU on the other and them being worlds apart.
And equally I am concerned about the mushrooming of groups —there are something like 25, 26, 27 — all attempting to do various things within West Belfast.
Another point is that there is a major need for advanced factories in West Belfast.
These are some of the points I feel we need to target on and work on.
The way I would see it is that there is a need for a broad consensus between government, IDB, LEDU, DED and all the various government agencies and community groups, economists and experts and the people on the ground themselves, because I don't think the government has it within their power to solve the problem and I don't think experts have it within their power to solve the problem.
I think it is a pulling together of all the strands, and even at that stage it will be a struggle.
There is one final point I would like to make and I know that many people may not accept it, but I think there will not be any significant improvement here while violence persists.
I think that violence is economic suicide and as well as being destructive of the people on the ground of their economic well being, I think it lets those responsible off the hook.
It's an excuse used time and time again that we can't do anything because it would be blown up.
I think that has been used unjustifiably.
Nevertheless, it's a major obstacle to much of the inward investment that is needed here and we need substantial inward investment.
West Belfast Action for the Unemployed has been active on the punitive effects of social security policies on unemployed people in the area.
CAITRIONA RUANE of West Belfast Action for the Unemployed and one of the organisers of this conference is our next speaker.
West Belfast Action for the Unemployed
Caitriona Ruane
I am speaking on behalf of West Belfast Action for the Unemployed, a group of local community activists and welfare rights workers.
It was established in October of last year in response to major new legislation commonly known as the ‘actively seeking work legislation’.
I would like to outline some of the major terms of the legislation, the far reaching implications it has for unemployed people and what we as a local group are trying to do to combat it.
In October 1989 the British government introduced the new actively seeking work legislation.
The main provisions are:
1)
unemployed people will have to provide evidence every week to prove that they have been actively seeking work;
2)
unemployed people will not be able to turn down a job offer on the basis of the pay being too low;
3)
for the first thirteen weeks of unemployment people are allowed to look for jobs that they want to do or are skilled or experienced to do but after thirteen weeks they will be compelled to take any job that comes along.
There is the danger of seeing this as just another piece of regressive legislation from a government which cares little about the unemployed, but on closer examination the far reaching implications are quite frightening.
Implications of the Actively Seeking Work Legislation
In order to understand the implications of this legislation it must be seen in the context of overall Tory economic policy on employment.
According to Tory thinking, a successful economic miracle has taken place over the last six years.
What we are constantly being fed with is that unemployment figures have been falling, that a successful economic miracle has taken place, that unemployment is a thing of the past.
Over the last number of years the way unemployment figures have been measured has been altered 31 times creating an entirely distorted picture.
It is now believed that to get a true account of unemployment the current official figures should be multiplied by 1.5.
The problem, according to the Tories, is the unemployed themselves — they have a bad attitude, they lack the skills and drive, they are not prepared to be flexible, they won't travel.
It is the old ‘they don't want to work syndrome’, the classic case of blaming the victim.
The government is now devising methods to enable them to use the welfare state to control people and make them tow the line.
It is very interesting to look at one of the more recent leaflets brought out by the government, called Helping you back to work — Information for claimants.‘
Job Hunting Tips
Telephoning employers
have pen and paper ready;
if you use a payphone, have enough money ready in case you have to hold on;
say why you are phoning and give the job title and name of contact;
be prepared to answer questions about your background and work experience.
Filling in application forms
read through the form before you start;
fill it in as neatly as possible (do a rough copy first if you need to);
make sure that all the information you give is as accurate as possible;
read the form through afterwards to make sure you haven't missed anything out.
Going for an interview
make sure you know how to get there (plan your routine in advance);
arrive a few minutes early;
take with you: details of your previous job, any certificates you have, copies of references;
think of the questions the employer is likely to ask you and how you will answer them.
If you would like to know more about successful job hunting, including writing letters of application and interviews, ask for Jobhunt Booklet No 1 —‘Get that Job’.’
While some people may need this kind of advice this is highly insulting to unemployed people and reflects how the government view the unemployed.
Current government strategy on unemployment has been described fairly aptly as being the carrot and stick approach.
In this case, the carrots are the YTP, ACE schemes and other so- called voluntary training schemes.
(It is interesting to note that the right to benefit for 16 and 17 year olds has been denied and these young people either accept some form of youth training or get nothing at all.)
The stick is the new actively seeking work legislation.
It is a ludicrous situation of expecting people in high areas of unemployment like the Falls or the Shankill to look for jobs that don't exist, to train for jobs that are not there.
This legislation requires that people for the first thirteen weeks that they are unemployed have the right to look for a job which they have experience in and enjoy doing, but after 13 weeks they are required to take any job that comes along.
For example, a qualified electrician who has worked for thirty years in that profession could be forced to take an ACE post.
As already mentioned the legislation does not consider low pay as an acceptable reason for turning down a job.
The government is denying the unemployed a basic human right, as stated in Article 23 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948:
‘Everyone has the right to work, to free choice of employment, to just and favourable conditions of work and to protection against unemployment.’
Training schemes are now being devised to make people more employable.
Employers' needs are taken into account and the unemployed are geared towards those.
Currently in Britain, private companies are taking over the running of the big training schemes.
While training is obviously important, the concept of it is becoming increasingly devalued.
Training schemes are being used to keep a pool of potential workers with low expectations who are forced to take any job that might come along, no matter what the conditions or level of pay.
The British government is leaving the way wide open for some training schemes to further exploit unemployed people by giving them £10 on top of their dole.
What the government neglect to highlight is that these people have few rights and conveniently disappear off the unemployment register.
Apart from the above mentioned general problems there are specific groups in society who will be particularly affected by the legislation.
For women it has serious consequences because childcare costs are not taken into account.
Women have historically and traditionally been stuck in low paid, non-unionised, often part-time jobs.
This legislation, far from doing anything to alleviate this, further compounds it by enshrining it in legislation.
For travelling people, their separate culture, their lack of access to education and training has not even been considered, not to mention the high levels of overt racism from settled people.
The idea of them having to bring fortnightly evidence that they have been looking for work when in the majority of cases they are not even permitted onto premises to ask for a job suggests an obvious indifference on the part of the policy makers.
When our group raised the issues of travellers with one of the DHSS offices here we were told that everyone is allowed two weeks holidays every year.
The fact they confused travellers with people taking their yearly holidays says a lot.
People working voluntarily for organisations will be affected.
On the one hand we have Prince Charles and Lady Di encouraging us to do voluntary work, telling us how noble it is and on the other hand we are told it might actually go against us because it takes up our valuable time when we should be looking for work.
Sectarianism and intimidation in the workplace have not been taken into account either, when we asked about this at the same meeting we were told you had to prove you were being intimidated.
What barometer is there to measure fear and intimidation?
All in all the people this legislation will hit hardest are the people who are most disadvantaged, the most marginalised in our society.
Action for the Unemployed
Given all the aforementioned, what has our group tried to do to combat this new legislation?
We are a relatively small group and therefore are limited in what we can do.
However, we have three main aims:
1)
To advise and be in solidarity with people affected by the legislation so they know how to deal with it;
2)
To provide information to all the advice workers in the area;
3)
To make the legislation unworkable in the North of Ireland.
Our activities since we began include preparing information packs for advice centres and welfare rights workers, leafleting the DHSS offices so people know about the legislation, networking with other groups in Belfast, and other parts of Ireland, North and South and with groups in Britain, lobbying and generally trying to make this legislation unworkable.
Since it has been introduced 43 people have been cut off the dole and 21 continue to receive reduced rates of social security in the North of Ireland.
There is also an alarmingly high number of people who are on a warning, especially in the Andersonstown area.
Conclusion
The actively seeking work legislation affects everyone.
It is a direct attack on the unemployed and working class people, on women, travellers, trade unions, illiterate and homeless people.
It has far reaching implications for the voluntary sector, for any organisations with ACE workers or voluntary workers and for trade unions.
We must take it on board, we must come together, network, campaign against this.
We must show that this legislation is unworkable, that the unemployed are not to blame.
It is the policies of successive governments to discipline the unemployed.
These same governments have been and continue to be the cause of mass unemployment and emigration.
Let us be clear where the fault lies.
We are sick and tired of low paid, temporary ‘one year on two year off’ so-called jobs.
What we are asking for is a basic human right as enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights ––the right to participate in society, the right to a future for our children, for our community, the right to a decent job, a real job.
Our final speaker is co-author of the Obair Report and is here today on behalf of Obair, the Campaign for Employment in West Belfast.
He is also a member of the conference organising committee — MIKE TOMLINSON.
Obair — the Campaign for Employment in West Belfast
Mike Tomlinson
Introduction
It is nearly two years now since we published our report on unemployment in West Belfast.
& sup1 ; I want to talk about reactions to the report and to highlight a few issues which have arisen since it was written.
The main recommendations of the Obair Report boiled down to two things.
Firstly we called for a major and sustained programme of development within West Belfast in order to reverse the history of long-term decline.
This we suggested could be handled by a locally-based Task Force which would plan and co-ordinate development.
Secondly we urged that the marginalisation of the area and the social exclusion of many of its people should be addressed by a concerted effort to open up employment opportunities outside West Belfast and by a serious attempt to involve local people in development decisions.
In a nutshell, development and democracy — the beginnings of a transformation of the discriminatory economic and political relationships that have held West Belfast down since the rise of industrial capitalism in the north-east of Ireland.
Just before the Obair Report appeared we all heard the first of many announcements about the British government's Making Belfast Work policy.
And over the past eighteen months several agencies, among them the International Fund for Ireland and LEDU, have begun to have a presence in the most economically underdeveloped areas and to make claims about how they are targeting resources on places like West Belfast.
How should we understand these developments?
In the first place we believe that the argument put forward in the Obair Report about territorial justice (or rather injustice) has won widespread acceptance.
The simple idea that resources ought to be concentrated in areas where unemployment is highest has struck home.
This argument carries particular political significance in a society in which the divisions between Catholics and Protestants are so obviously manifest in differential unemployment rates.
Secondly, there has been some recognition that unemployment and job creation should be the concern of a whole range of agencies and departments, not just the DED and its off-shoots.
Under Making Belfast Work, for example, the DoE and the DHSS have been persuaded to ‘bend’ some programmes towards the designated ‘disadvantaged areas’.
These two points — let's call them ‘jobs for the unemployed’ and ‘multi-agency employment awareness’— have only been accepted partially, however.
While it is good to see statutory and voluntary bodies asking themselves, ‘what are we doing about West Belfast?’ the responses have been less than convincing.
I want to put forward four reasons as to why current initiatives are of limited value.
These are reasons or issues which have increasingly come to dominate our discussions within Obair in the past year.
1.
Quantity
The first issue is about quantity.
What new resources are being devoted to developing the employment of West Belfast people?
This question was the principal focus of Obair's first Briefing Paper on the Making Belfast Work initiative which we issued last September (and which is available at this conference).
The Briefing Paper makes the point that more resources have been taken out of the area in the last decade than are being put back in now.
It also says that very little of the new money is being spent on things which are genuinely different and distinguishable from existing statutory programmes and policies.
This problem of ‘additionality’ has of course been a long-standing one in relation to the British government and European Community assistance — as discussed in the Obair Report.
One indication of current priorities is that Making Belfast Work has less money committed to it in total over four years than is spent on prisons in a single year.
Regarding international aid, we might want to observe that the International Fund for Ireland has only recently produced a ‘disadvantaged areas initiative’.
Perhaps the most substantial change in resource allocation since the Obair Report is the IDB's support for Montupet at Dunmurry which has been explicitly represented by government as bringing jobs to West Belfast.
It is not clear that Montupet jobs will go to the unemployed of West Belfast.
Our efforts to meet the company have so far been unsuccessful, but as far as we understand from the AEU (which has a single union agreement with Montupet), there are no special mechanisms to target recruitment and training on the unemployed and it is worth bearing in mind that the code of practice of the new Fair Employment Act puts the idea of the merit principle above that of equality of outcome or the achievement of social justice.
This is discussed in Obair's second Briefing Paper.
Nor have we seen any indications that Montupet will establish a workplace creche which might improve the chances of some women getting jobs on the shop-floor.
And will the plant achieve its quota of employees with disabilities?
I doubt it.
2.
Quality
If quantity can be criticized, what about quality?
Obair has received many anecdotes and complaints about the conduct of employment and training policies, and it is our hope that we will hear more along these lines in the course of this conference.
Let's just say that the serious lack of accountability in some schemes leaves them wide open to be abused for private and illegal gain.
Another concern we have is that special employment and training measures,(now catering for over 31,000 people in the North), have become a substitute for jobs — a way of reducing the official unemployment statistics and complementing the massive statistical fraud which those figures now represent.
We do not have a coherent training and development strategy linked to employment growth.
The efforts of educators and trainers can easily turn to demoralisation in the absence of meaningful employment opportunities.
Obair has also had reservations about private sector developments in West Belfast — or perhaps they should be called public sector developments with a private face.
On the one hand there is the investment in enterprise parks for small businesses.
Whatever the intrinsic merits of these, we are critical of the belief that small businesses can make a big impact on the unemployment problem, given the high rate of business failure.
On the other hand there are the large-scale developments in retail outlets and other local services.
Who can doubt the value and necessity of these as locally-based services?
But I think we should be very wary of equating the growth of shopping facilities with the reconstruction of the local economy.
These projects create, in the main, part-time low paid jobs and do nothing to change the structural position of Catholics in the labour market.
3.
Style
The third problem we wish to highlight is style.
Style has become more important than substance.
The proliferation of glossy reports, brochures and prospectuses may be good for the designers and a printing company or two, but our impression is that this is more about the marketing of the British government than about marketing West Belfast, and we wonder what it achieves in terms of breaking down outsiders' negative stereotypes of the area and of the people who live here.
Media coverage of local economic development has echoed this, being largely ill-informed and uncritical.
The same schemes are celebrated repeatedly with the government squeezing out every last drop of credit from West Belfast projects.
The dangers of this are two-fold in our view.
Firstly, it creates the impression within West Belfast that more jobs are coming on stream than is actually the case, raising aspirations beyond their fulfilment.
Secondly, it encourages the belief and even resentment outside the area that most loose government money is going to nationalist West Belfast.
It is unfortunate if this in turn results in government decision-making based  on pacifying sectarian jealousies rather than on clearly articulated criteria of need.
4.
Politics
Our last concern must be with the politics of economic development in West Belfast.
One of the more memorable interventions of the Minister for the Economy in recent times was this:
‘It has to be in our interests…for us to try to get more jobs in West Belfast…that is the way in which we will reduce the terrorist menace, by making people economically independent from terrorism.
That is the prime strategic objective of the government.’
& sup2 ;
This rationale may be necessary self-reassurance to a government which has such obvious difficulty feeling positive about public spending on jobs.
But we think it is highly regrettable that economic development is being seen as an integral part of the war against terrorism, not least for those charged with making it work on the ground.
& sup3 ;
One of the hallmarks of Conservative British governments in the 1980s was the readiness to spend large sums of money promoting the private market and a set of values which have come to be known as the ‘enterprise culture’— witness the £1,200 million spent on the privatisation of Shorts and the shipyard.
Another theme is to portray the losers, the ‘underclass’, as the product of individual weaknesses and delinquent lifestyles.
The signs are that the Thatcherites are now losing confidence in their economic and social project.
The absence of a target date by which the Protestant/Catholic unemployment differential would be significantly reduced is partly explained by this.
Nevertheless, the DED's latest policy document is still stuck in the old mould.
& sup4 ; We are now being persuaded that ‘the key to growth’ is, amongst other things.
to think of ‘training for emigration’ as a positive solution to a permanent unemployment problem which we are told arises because of our relatively high birthrate.
This ‘new economic consensus’, as it is being referred to, is already preparing the ground for planned cuts in the economic development budget and the day the Making Belfast Work initiative comes to an end.
Conclusion
In conclusion, there are some who have counselled Obair to accept government recognition of West Belfast's unemployment problem graciously and not to rock the boat.
But we are not going to be apologetic about our efforts.
We will continue to argue for employment for all and will continue to criticize unequal development, discriminatory development, low-budget development and development designed more for propaganda than progress.
We will also seek to promote forms of accountability which go beyond dinner parties at Stormont for selected priests and other notables.
REFERENCES
1.
Unemployment in West Belfast: The Obair Report, by Bill Rolston and Mike Tomlinson, Beyond the Pale Publications, Belfast 1988.
2.
Newsbreak, Radio Ulster, 19 November 1989.
3.
For more discussion of this see Irish Times, 13/3/90, p.11.
4.
Northern Ireland, Competing in the 1990s, the Key to Growth, Department of Economic Development.
SECTION TWO
WORKSHOPS
Introduction to Workshop Reports
On arrival, conference participants were invited to sign up for a workshop of their choice.
To facilitate this, the conference organisers had prepared a list of topics and drawn up a list of questions which might be considered in the discussions.
These are reproduced in Appendix 2 
Workshop A IDB, LEDU and the IFI: Developing West Belfast?
Chaired by Stevie Johnston
Recorded by Geraldine McAteer
The chair began by stating that 90% of the jobs promoted in Northern Ireland were in companies which already exist here and, given the structure of industry, very few of these jobs would go to West Belfast.
The only hope for jobs in West Belfast was to create new jobs here.
One contributor replied that it is very difficult to create new jobs at all and especially difficult to attract jobs to Northern Ireland.
Therefore there was an added problem in bringing jobs to West Belfast.
The reply to that was that the IDB do not have an idea of how to develop West Belfast.
They do not have a strategy.
They merely respond to ideas from local people.
The suggestion was made that there should be community discussions with LEDU, that West Belfast people, in the absence of ideas from the IDB, are going to have to come up with their own ideas and develop them in conjunction with the universities, industrialists, and so on.
A hand-holding operation was needed between local people, the Department of Economic Development, etc. to develop realistic ideas.
The problem at the moment was that people were being told there was a dearth of money.
The claim was also made that there was very little support at all for local small businesses from government agencies.
Another contributor said that if we asked ourselves the question: ‘Do the agencies discriminate against West Belfast?’, the answer had to be ‘yes’.
There might be some very well-intentioned people in them, but the institutions nevertheless did discriminate.
Conway Mill is a case in point, where a number of local businesses were not assisted financially because they located there and were eventually forced out.
Local people had approached the IFI and were turned down, but would have been funded had their businesses been located in Bangor.
Catholics are discriminated against, and that is a fact.
In addition to this, there is also structural discrimination against Catholics which determines that they will also be discriminated against simply because of where they live.
Businesses will not be funded in areas where Catholics live.
Montupet, for example, is a company which is supposed to be an opportunity for employment to the Catholics of West Belfast.
But the job advertisements immediately omit people without experience, so therefore Catholics are omitted because they were historically excluded from those types of jobs and could not therefore have any experience.
West Belfast is discriminated against by a Tory government which discriminates against its own working class in its own country.
To the Tory government West Belfast is on the periphery of a periphery and the only reason that the development of West Belfast is on the agenda is because the people of West Belfast have put it there.
The people of West Belfast are deliberately made to look different.
Not only is West Belfast discriminated against by the IDB, but the IDB discriminates in favour of other areas.
Richard Needham has talked of ‘facing Gerry Adams eyeball to eyeball’, but the truth is that Richard Needham refused to talk to the MP about development in West Belfast.
Richard Needham, it was said, is only interested in appearing to develop the area in so far as it would assist him in his fight against ‘terrorism’.
One participant had conducted some research into small businesses in West Belfast for a research report.
This had involved asking about twenty small businesses if they had been assisted by LEDU and what were their attitudes to LEDU.
As a result of the research, it was clear that there was some discrimination against small businesses in West Belfast.
The response to the mention of LEDU was extremely negative.
Some of the businesses were commercially successful, but only because those involved in owning and running them had invested life savings and borrowed substantially.
They complained that they could not get loans from  LEDU and if they did, the money only came after long delays.
One particularly successful firm said that LEDU officials suggested that they relocate in Antrim, and that if they did they would be open to considerably more funding.
The firm's owner said that the impression given was that to operate a business in West Belfast was to somehow be involved in some kind of seditious activity.
The person was even at pains to point out while the interview was being conducted that they had no time or interest in politics at all.
Another successful firm interviewed said that, far from the IFI helping financially, they had actually done their business and a number of others in their enterprise park a lot of harm.
The firm's owner had tried to get funding from the IFI but couldn't even get the application form.
Yet a group of Americans were brought around their business with television cameras and remarked how the Fund had helped this firm out.
The firm's owner assured them that he had never received a penny and was paying a large rent for his premises.
When the subsequent television programme was broadcast, he lost a lot of business from his Protestant customers as they thought he was receiving funds from the IFI.
Finally, it was argued that the discrimination against West Belfast also extended to the banks as they were slow to provide loans to local business.
A local business entrepreneur added that it was incredibly hard to get funds from LEDU.
Their firm had been given short shrift and was passed from one office to the next.
But another participant said that the field workers in LEDU were very useful, but the problem from their point of view was in getting money from higher sources.
But further confirmation of the agency discrimination against the area was provided by another contributor who said that the IDB has run away from Belfast and is out around Newtownabbey, Newtownards and Castlereagh.
Foreign investors have been brought out around these places, but none have been brought to West Belfast.
There is now an increase in the funding for West Belfast and the IDB will have to get to grips with it.
There is a major upheaval in LEDU in relation to West Belfast and a larger amount of resources is being put into the area.
But LEDU seems to be simply shifting small businesses from one location to another within West Belfast.
This will not solve the problem here nor create the jobs which are needed — that is up to the IDB and the government.
The IFI does not have a good record, but their credibility has improved since the Board was changed and Brett, the previous chair, had left.
Hopefully they will not be so rigid with their resources.
One participant recollected attending an Inquiry into unemployment a number of years ago and asked the question: ‘Has anything changed?’
Unemployment in West Belfast was still at critical levels.
While the work of the local development agencies should be supported, their performance should also be monitored.
A lot of importance should be attached to looking at what sources of information are needed to measure the social and economic performance of the development agencies.
The problems of implementing policy showed as you go down through the layers.
It was not good enough that the IDB say they don't know what to do to develop West Belfast; this issue should be addressed.
The global restructuring of capital was referred to by another participant.
This led to companies like Dupont axing 189,000 jobs on a global basis.
So what chance had the IDB of attracting jobs to Northern Ireland?
West Belfast had a bad image; there is a climate of fear and people are leaving.
If a Japanese firm were brought on a tour around West Belfast they would see all the barbed wire and be discouraged.
Capitalism needs capitalists, and there were very few on the ground in West Belfast.
The Catholic church is involved in job creation, but they are not businessmen.
Coming to the fifth question on the agenda — how can the development agencies contribute to the employment prospects of West Belfast residents both inside and outside of the area?— one contributor said that he had spoken to marketing people from the IDB and that they had no interest in West Belfast.
Another contributor said that West Belfast was regarded as a dead loss by the IDB because of the violence in the area.
There was a low standard of educational attainment, as shown by 11+ results from the Lower Shankill.
There should be an emphasis on improving the education standards of West Belfast people.
But another member of the workshop was annoyed that the educational ability of the local people was being blamed for the lack of jobs in the area.
People in West Belfast can easily train for jobs if the jobs were there to train for.
This was confirmed by yet another member; local people had trained for the De Lorean plant and produced cars in record time.
Adding to this was the contribution of another participant that it was wrong to view West Belfast people as uneducated.
West Belfast contained an enormous amount of interest in culture, music and the arts.
The people here had written plays, poetry, literature and formed their own successful Irish language schools.
They were a resourceful and talented people.
For this reason, he invited the previous speaker who had first referred to the lack of education of the people of the area to spend a day or two in the area sometime to experience it first hand.
Another contributor agreed that it was possible to trot out any number of excuses for the lack of jobs, such as the political unrest; but unemployment existed in West Belfast before the political unrest.
The will is in West Belfast to train for jobs.
The only government policy, if they have one, is to defeat ‘terrorism’.
There should be some monitoring of what the statutory agencies were doing in relation to West Belfast.
Finally it was pointed out that there was a renewed emphasis in government departments on stressing emigration and reduced birth rates as a way of dealing with the unemployment rate.
Recent reports stressed that training and education would be a stimulus to emigration.
Since employment was not available here, the unspoken suggestion was that the recipients of training and education would emigrate in search of work.
Workshop B: What is Training For?
haired by Liam McCarney
Recorded by Kevin Delaney
The first speaker had clear ideas of what constituted quality training.
One only needed to look at the Government Training Centre at Boucher Road in West Belfast for a good example.
The main criterion of what is good training is to reach the National Vocational Qualification (NVQ), which is a standard recognised by government, industry and business.
This should be followed by a job, and a person's chances of getting a job would be enhanced by obtaining a recognised qualification.
Another way of achieving this would fall short of a recognised qualification or certificate but could amount to the giving of credits for completion of parts of a training course.
It was objected to this that availability of jobs was a crucial factor.
There was a lack of information about availability in Northern Ireland, even though everyone knew that the situation was serious.
However, in spite of that, the availability both here and in Britain should be known to the public at large.
In addition, availability of employment in the rest of Europe should also be known because we are growing closer to Europe economically.
Another speaker referred to motivation of trainees.
The perception of their situation by the unemployed must be changed, and if you do not give a higher expectation to people, how could you motivate them to participate in training schemes?
Putting it bluntly, if there was no job at the end of the scheme, why would someone from West Belfast bother to take up training at all?
It was also said that good motivation alone was not enough for the unemployed as training was necessary, however determined a person was to obtain employment.
Several speakers agreed that there seemed to be a great waste of resources in the whole training area.
The government in particular was always anxious to give the appearance of doing something.
On the one hand it liked to  show through the media that it was actively involved in promoting training, but people had the feeling that the training policy of the government was ineffective.
It wasn't going anywhere.
Why, given the extremely high level of unemployment, was the government constantly making public its efforts in the training area?
What was it doing proportionately to increase the general availability of jobs?
Surely the economic regeneration of the area was a priority, without which much vaunted training schemes were somewhat pointless.
There was overall agreement that this point was justified and central to criticism of government policy in West Belfast.
Training was good in itself and would undoubtedly help individuals to get jobs.
But it was not a solution to overall levels of unemployment.
It did not make the general pool of jobs any larger.
One speaker argued in favour of categorising trainees.
The various NVQ grades were desirable and ought to be retained.
It would give a person particular skills for a particular type of job.
Categorisation was in principle good — after all, it was done in different parts of the general educational system.
This was strongly objected to  by another person.
She said it was wrong to categorise people according to specific skills.
Trainees should be given basic skills and then choice could be made later on as something forced on the individual by the structure of the labour market.
Another speaker replied that the existence of YTP was testament to the failure of the general education system.
It was necessary because of that failure.
However, it was better to give people some skills although overall it was a waste of money in West Belfast.
The group discussed the extent to which training was related to jobs.
Many thought that training was a technique by the government to take people off the unemployment register or to make them feel that because they were ‘trainees’ they were not therefore ‘unemployed’.
This was playing games where at the end of training there was no greater number of jobs available.
The providers of training ended up playing the government's games and giving it credibility when it was in reality doing nothing in a serious situation.
In particular, the ACE scheme was heavily and repeatedly criticised.
It was a form of cheap labour.
It was a substitute for providing real jobs.
There was no real training involved.
It provided employers with a cheap labour force.
They had little or no permanence and cohesion and therefore no organisation and no prospect of standing up for their rights.
They were being exploited by employers.
They had employment merely for one year and no chance of employment in which they could make long-term plans for buying a house, for retiring and so on.
Another effect of ACE was to take jobs from others in full-time employment because, for the above reasons, employers naturally turned to ACE if they could get away with it.
One speaker was positive about ACE.
She said that more money was currently available from government for training within the ACE scheme.
Training in ACE was supposed to maximise output in the scheme and to enhance subsequent employability.
This required a commitment from the ACE manager to provide training.
If the manager had no commitment, there would be little or no training aspect.
But the employee must also insist on being trained.
Otherwise the training element would fail.
The current thinking was to turn ACE into an employer training scheme, but if those involved — both managers and employers — did not push training, ACE would fail in training.
NVQ should be available within the ACE scheme.
It could be done on the job using a National Council assessor.
If something like this was not done, money for training within ACE would dry up and ACE itself could be gone ‘in five years’, claimed the speaker.
The meeting questioned recent government changes in the funding of YTP and JTP.
Further education colleges, one person said, now charge ‘to stay in business’, and because of the ‘block funding’ changes introduced in April 1990, they have pulled out of YTP.
They were also charging fees due from ACE schemes which the latter could not afford.
The changes were in line with what was described as government ‘privatisation’ of further education colleges.
The government views the colleges as being too expensive and unsuited to the task (e.g. they lacked quality control).
Someone pointed out that there was no adult institute for further education in Northern Ireland.
Such a body could be of importance for training.
The outlook was bleak: with ‘block funding’ and demographic changes, the 12 Government Training Centres, 42 YTP community workshops and 26 further education colleges could not all survive.
In addition, there is conflict between Government Training Centres and further education colleges on training.
They do not cooperate with each other.
There is no overall policy.
Future cooperation seems more unlikely, particularly in view of the recent changes which bring an element of privatisation to all sectors of training and hence lead to greater competition.
Competition is foreign to the voluntary commitment of many workers in YTP and running YTP as a business is not generally within their expertise, experience or wishes.
There was general agreement that the whole of training policy of the government was thoroughly unsatisfactory.
Providers felt they were working against each other to capture trainees to ensure their own survival.
They repeatedly stated that the situation was ‘hopeless’ in that there was little or no chance of employment at the end of training.
There was no government policy to fundamentally tackle unemployment and seen against that background, many at the meeting felt they were playing a game.
Trainees were being sought by a confusing mixture of providers competing with each other but unable to get them jobs in the end.
It felt like a game of ‘musical chairs’ and was demoralising.
It was hardly surprising that these negative attitudes were also held by the trainees themselves.
Some said they felt like giving up.
There was no overall sense of achievement in the training world.
Others said that to do so would damage further an already deprived population.
They had to keep going.
Workshop C: What Can Community Economic Development Achieve?
Chaired by Gerry Doherty
Recorded by Bill Love
Community economic development is now very much in vogue.
However, the term means different things to different people.
The workshop attempted to explore the issues involved and relate them to experience in West Belfast.
To this end the workshop began by referring to the information leaflet which accompanied the workshop.
A number of issues and areas of discussion were outlined in this leaflet.
These were intended as an aid to discussion, a means of stimulating debate.
As such, it was intended that the parameters of the debate would be flexible.
The opportunity was there for participants to develop the discussion as they saw fit.
The issues outlined in the information leaflet fell into three broad areas.
The first issue concerned whether the government's new-found commitment to community economic development actually represented an attempt by the government to shift responsibility for the structural problems being experienced in so-called deprived communities onto members of these communities.
Thus the responsibility for unemployment would be seen to lie with the unemployed, who would then be seen to be personally responsible for their own unemployment, poverty, etc.
However, rather than this being the case, is the fact that the government is supporting community economic development an admission that the state, through its economic development functions, has failed to provide opportunities which enable people in ‘deprived’ areas to become economically active and empowered and that something new was needed for areas of worst disadvantage?
As such, is it an attempt to involve local people in assessing the extent and nature of their problems and a means of involving them in developing new types of solutions?
Another important aspect of this is the issue of whether community economic development was merely a palliative measure with limited potential for addressing the problems of unemployment and deprivation experienced in areas such as West Belfast.
As such, by getting involved in this process, people were effectively exploiting themselves, that is, by creating poorly paid jobs, and under-resourced enterprises which offered inadequate training opportunities to those involved.
Through their involvement, rather than creating a platform for development, people were letting the government off the hook by attempting to find superficial and limited solutions to deep-rooted structural problems.
By addressing this broad issue it would be possible to develop a better understanding of what community economic development was about.
Having done this, the next area which needed to be addressed was present economic development policy as experienced in West Belfast.
The starting point for this was the need to decide whether the government did have a credible economic development strategy, whether there was any community focus to it, and how its various programmes impacted on communities within West Belfast.
This done, the next broad area to be covered was the need to examine the various models of community economic development, how local people can be involved in the process of regenerating their areas, how the process can best be facilitated and what can be realistically achieved.
In addition, what should the criteria be for evaluating the success of community economic development?
The discussion began with criticism of who is setting down the guidelines for development, and who is actually undertaking this community economic development work.
The need for the role of the community to be given paramount importance was stressed, that is, the community's own perception of needs and desire to do something for themselves (self-help).
One discussant then commented that it is not an either/or situation, that is, that either the government or the community should take sole responsibility for it, but it should be a responsibility shared by both government and community.
The crucial issue is the resourcing of community economic development; therefore, we should be asking are the present resources adequate and fairly distributed?
The example of the community business project was outlined, as was the example of Brownlow.
In the latter local people did not perceive themselves to be involved in assessing need and planning strategies.
Brownlow was felt by many in the group to be typical of government sponsored community economic development initiatives in that it was unrepresentative of local people in so far as local people felt excluded from the processes that were happening, even though substantial resources were being made available through the initiative.
The community business programme, on the other hand, was not the answer to mass unemployment such as exists in Brownlow.
However, it does present an opportunity for people to be empowered, for example in assessing needs, planning and implementing responses, even though these responses will not solve the totality of the problem.
Another discussant then stated that community economic development grows from economic and social need and a history of deprivation within a community.
As such, community economic development is a form of community action which has as its basis the community's own perception of its needs and the formulation of its own collective response to these needs.
This puts in perspective the Department of Economic Development's approach to community economic development, which has to date been one of employing outside consultants without sufficient consideration for the need of local input.
However, this has started to change.
Consultants can provide a source of expert advice for local groups, but the issue of who controls the process must be addressed as it was absolutely crucial for any community economic development.
It was stressed that the present efforts result in marginalised communities often remaining so, with the best organised, that is church groups, securing the majority of funding and aid.
There followed discussion of current government funding policies in West Belfast which were perceived as deliberately channelling funds through church organisations for political and security reasons.
In addition, it was noted that people in communities that have experienced long-term unemployment are often criticised for lacking the will to work.
However, the will to work is not lacking, but it is the access to skills and resources which is lacking.
The example of Ballymurphy Knitwear is apposite — a community initiative which failed because of inadequate resourcing and government support for the manifest will to work which the women involved displayed.
A further point made was that the larger political and economic context must be considered by those involved in community economic development.
Community businesses, it was suggested, should develop links with the trade union movement and the public sector.
The workshop then went on to examine whether the government had a credible community economic development policy and whether the various initiatives which it had set up represented such a strategy.
The government's commitment to the economic development of West Belfast was questioned.
Successive British governments had failed to tackle the economic and social problems which the area suffered from.
Instead, a number of short-term, palliative measures had been taken which gave the appearance that the problems were being addressed.
This was more to do with window dressing and the government's need to be seen to be doing something, rather than a serious attempt to tackle the problems.
The discussion then focused on the role of training and its role in community economic development.
There was criticism of much that passed for training.
Much of it was irrelevant to the needs of the individuals concerned; many skills offered did not offer the prospect of future employment, and quite a lot of training provision was inadequate.
Things were beginning to change, however, it was stated, but whether the changes were happening fast enough or on a scale appropriate to the scale of the problems was still not clear.
The group then discussed community economic development models other than or in addition to the private enterprise model, particularly the community cooperative business approach as exemplified in the Community Business Scotland initiative.
There was agreement that people should play an active, participatory, democratic role through community business in the regeneration of their own areas, and that this process can best be facilitated, as in Strathclyde, by supportive and sympathetic local government attitudes and action.
It was felt that to date such support had not been forthcoming in this region due to the prevailing indigenous political bias for private enterprise and to the lack of meaningful local government itself under direct rule.
The conflict between central policy and local needs was raised, another example cited being the policy of maintaining high interest rate levels to reduce inflation, resulting in an increasingly unhealthy fiscal climate for the establishment and survival of small businesses, both private and community.
Another alternative model for community economic development was raised, and the suggestion made that there needed to be consideration of and use of the public sector as a vehicle for community businesses servicing the Royal Victoria Hospital complex.
The next point raised was the issue of governmental under-resourcing of community businesses vis-a-vis private small business creation support efforts and the lack of a sufficiently large industrial base in the area to provide an adequate market for small firms.
In this context, the Springvale Project was cited, a project which will result in the removal of jobs from West Belfast and a further reduction of the industrial base.
The Springvale Project needs to be more directly related to the needs and involvement of the people of West Belfast.
In the same vein, the Laganside concept was termed a ‘third hand borrowed idea’ which does not relate to nor economically empower local communities.
In summing up the workshop all agreed that there exists no coherent government strategy for community economic development in West Belfast, but that an incoherent piecemeal patchwork of programmes and initiatives had been introduced which had only a superficial effect on the area's social and economic problems.
It was agreed that the government's macro-economic and social policies had been the cause of a de-resourcing of the area greater than any new resources made available, and that a detailed process-accountable strategy of community economic development on community business lines was required, not the present palliative, cosmetic measures.
Workshop D: How Can Employment for Women be Developed?
Equal Opportunities Issues and Job Creation
Chaired by Patricia McKeown
Recorded by Louise O'Meara
The workshop covered a broad spectrum of concerns and issues and there was a large degree of unanimity as to what the main stumbling blocks to employment for women are.
Public Sector Employment
Currently the main source of permanent employment for women in West Belfast ‘lucky’ enough to get a job is public sector employment and this is generally part-time and low-paid.
With the current policies of privatisation being pursued by the government, women are most adversely affected; 80% of the jobs currently under threat are women's jobs.
On this basis, it was argued that workers in the Royal Victoria Hospital and in other public sector agencies should be supported in their campaigns to save their jobs and against privatisation.
With the onset of the government's new community care policies, many women will find themselves playing the traditional role of carers without payment and will consequently find it more difficult to get out to work.
Also linked with the new community care policies is the problem of low-paid ACE jobs and how these are supplementing statutory provision.
Childcare
Another issue raised at the workshop was that of creches.
While much media attention was given to the recent tax incentives (made available for workplace nurseries only—introduced in the last budget (April 1990), it was felt that this means nothing for women in West Belfast or the North of Ireland in general.
There are currently only two workplace nurseries in the North — Queen's University and the Royal Victoria Hospital — but the irony is that even in this extremely limited provision most women workers cannot afford to use these facilities.
For example, the RVH creche costs £35 per week per child and is generally seen to be ‘only for children of professionals’.
Other social welfare policies cause problems for women.
If married women want to do a training course, a childcare allowance has been made available.
This allowance is very limited — it is available only for married women whose child/children are over four years of age and who have been signing on for the previous six months.
Most women with children are on order books and would not have registered as unemployed and would not, therefore, be eligible.
For women ‘lucky’ enough to get this childcare allowance, their husbands' dole payments would decrease accordingly.
Social Welfare
The social welfare system as it operates in practice leads women to low-paid jobs.
Many married women whose husbands sign on for the family find themselves forced to seek work in the black economy in order to make ends meet; this is often seen as less risky than the possibility of their husbands being caught.
Another example of welfare related problems was cited.
In some of the Derry shirt factories women had to quit their jobs when their husbands became unemployed due to low/inadequate wages.
This was prior to the introduction of the Actively Seeking Work welfare legislation whereby one is automatically disqualified from benefit if you leave your job voluntarily.
Employment for Women in West Belfast
With the advent of 1992 it was felt that we have a lot of ‘catching up’ to do with other European countries.
We have a much higher number of women workers in low-paid, low status, non-unionised jobs and higher rates of unemployment among women.
Statistics hide the latter since married women are usually not registered as unemployed; if they were on the register, unemployment statistics would change dramatically!
With regard to the perceived needs of the post-1992 Europe, free movement of labour and equality of opportunity are much talked about concepts.
It was pointed out during the workshop that women have always been flexible in terms of employment, but because they have to be rather than because they want to be.
Part-time, low-paid, flexi-hour jobs have been the lot of many women in West Belfast with other (unpaid) women in the family and the community taking care of the children.
It was also noted that the men of West Belfast generally do not play a role in the latter!
Between childcare and now ‘granny care’(with the introduction of the Griffith Report's recommendations) women will be caught at both ends in terms of attempting to find employment.
As with women, the jobs on offer for girls and young women are what is termed officially by the EC as ‘atypical work’, that is, part-time and low-paid.
For, example, the majority of workers employed by Debenhams in Belfast city centre's much hyped Castlecourt complex are women.
But far from contributing to meaningful employment for women, it has created yet another series of bad jobs.
The majority of women employed there work a 15-hour week and consequently don't pay a National Insurance stamp and lose maternity rights and pay.
This policy of jobs at all costs is doing nothing to meet the needs of women.
While some legislative rights exist for women, we have to fight to get them.
This usually involves going through the courts — a lengthy and expensive process.
And for women who work less than 16 hours per week (as do the majority of women in West Belfast) the legislation does not cover them; there is no obligation to monitor those working under 16 hours per week!
Youth and Job Training Programmes
The Youth Training and Job Training Programmes perpetuate these traditional roles and expectations of women as (unpaid) carers.
A recent report from the EOC found that ‘overall the Youth Training Programme does little or nothing to widen girls’ horizons or to provide ways out of the low-paid and dead-end jobs which are a feature of many  women's lives in Northern Ireland today’.
YTP, far from offering a means through training of combating the segregation of the sexes in employment reinforces that segregation!
In West Belfast Glenand is the only YTP doing a girls-only non-traditional training course.
Related to this is of course the general sexist bias throughout the educational system whereby from an early age girls are discouraged from taking subjects such as maths and science, etc. which could lead to high status apprenticeship training and further education in the science and technology fields.
A discussion developed around the issue of training and it was felt that the foregoing discussion calls into question what you would want training for.
Training schemes should look at skills existing among women in the area and see how these could be developed and upgraded.
Also, if the government is serious about developing decent employment opportunities for women, the training and educational agencies will have to look to broadening their remits to include and promote non-traditional areas of work for women.
Job Creation Initiatives
Other possible routes towards employment for women include setting up businesses with the help of certain state agencies such as the IDB, LEDU, etc.
However, it was felt that these agencies are not very supportive of women who approach them.
A few women make it despite the system and then become vaunted as a great example of personal initiative and drive, thus suggesting that employment is a matter of personal ability rather than an economic and political issue.
Other areas of concern for women working or wanting to work outside the home were identified.
Traditional values and attitudes to women working outside the home can still cause problems between partners where the woman works outside the home.
Related to this is the issue of the double workload women have to cope with if they work outside the home — paid work by day and unpaid work for the remainder of the time.
The Future
The workshop identified a number of issues needing to be tackled if employment for women is to be created.
Changes in the ways employment, training and welfare policies operate need to be brought about so as to get rid of the many disincentives that exist for women wishing to return to training or employment.
Agencies such as the Belfast Education and Library Board should have material built into curricula and courses to ensure the rights and needs of women and girls are met.
Discussion in the community needs to be initiated and encouraged to look at all these issues that affect women.
Women in the community need to find out what is possible for us as a prerequisite to identifying what is not available and what we would like to see.
Options need to be created and opened up for women.
Successes in the area of  women's employment, though few and far between, were mentioned.
A small number of cooperatives and self-managed enterprises have got off to a good start.
Women continue to struggle against the tide of agencies like LEDU and are beginning to force these agencies to take the issue of  women's employment more seriously.
Many such agencies now have a women's unit to deal with women's needs vis-a-vis employment.
Finally, a number of categories of women were identified as having particular problems with regard to employment, namely travelling women and girls, who suffer a myriad of problems, older women, and lone parents.
These groupings within the general community of women need special attention to redress the balance of lack of opportunity.
Women working in West Belfast do so in spite of government policies rather than because of them.
Most women are forced through economic necessity to work in part-time low-paid jobs with quite a large number in the black economy.
Workshop E: Making Belfast Work or Making the Underclass?
Chaired by Bill Rolston
Recorded by Féilim Ó hAdhmaill
The workshop began with the itemisation of some key facts and questions about Making Belfast Work.
The Making Belfast Work initiative is said to be the centre of economic development policy in West Belfast.
It amounts to £92.5 million over five years which is supposed to be additional money to what is already budgeted.
One issue for local people is whether this money is actually additional.
Another issue is how decisions are taken as to how the money is distributed.
Is anything new actually happening?
The Belfast Action Teams (BATs), for example, which are part of Making Belfast Work, say they exist to fund innovation; however, a lot of people are suspicious of this claim.
For example, the Department of Health and Social Services is putting a lot of money into funding health visitors to visit first-time mothers, but some would argue that there is nothing innovative about this.
Is that not what the Department's job is all about anyway?
Is the Making Belfast Work initiative simply a lot of hype and nothing else?
A number of participants agreed.
One said that a lot of people didn't understand what Making Belfast Work was all about because they lacked information on it.
Another added that one of the purposes of the media hype was actually to deliberately confuse people.
Much of the government's initiative was simply job substitution — the collection of rubbish or cleaning up the environment on the cheap using ACE workers instead of full-time employed council staff.
The government had to show that job substitution was not taking place, that real jobs were actually being created and that the money was additional if people were to believe that they were sincere.
One contributor said that one could see the contrast between the traffic volume of people going to work in the morning in West Belfast compared to East Belfast, and also the quality of cars.
This showed where the money was and where economic development was occurring.
The question then was where exactly was the Making Belfast Work money going; where was the employment that it was supposed to be creating?
The suggestion made was that it was not about economic development, but about buying off the nationalist community.
In the same vein another contributor drew attention to Richard Needham's statement on Radio Ulster on 19 November 1989, in which he said that the aim of the government in West Belfast was to improve economic development there in order to attack ‘terrorism’ and that this was the government's prime aim.
If this is what Making Belfast Work is all about, then it showed a lack of concern for real economic development per se and revealed that there was an alternative agenda.
Making Belfast Work, suggested one participant, only came about because of conflict research; it was based on buying off the nationalist community.
The issue of additionality was discussed at some length because of the light it might throw on whether there was more to Making Belfast Work than hype.
One person pointed out that in a recent interview Nigel Hamilton, the man in charge of the Belfast Special Action Team and therefore of Making Belfast Work, stated that the money for Making Belfast Work was additional to government planned spending in North and West Belfast.
But it may be additional in the same way as the government argues EEC money to the North is — that is, they argue that they plan their spending in the expectation that they will get the EEC money and would plan differently if they did not expect to get it.
However, this sounds remarkably like the money is not in fact additional at all.
Another participant pointed out that the Northern Ireland budget over the last five years had only increased in line with inflation.
Since the overall budget hadn't increased, the Making Belfast Work money could not be regarded as additional to that budget.
But another participant argued that it didn't really matter whether it was additional money or not.
The important thing was that it took people's minds away from national policies.
Another part of the strategy was an attempt to change community leadership in local areas where the government was having problems.
This was particularly true in areas like West Belfast where the government was anxious to undermine the vote for Sinn Féin.
Some BAT leaders have stated that the problem they have with places like Ballymurphy is that they cannot get any community leadership to support, financially and otherwise.
What they really mean is that they cannot find any acceptable community leadership to support.
Given these criticisms, a number of participants raised the issue of the lack of accountability in Making Belfast Work.
One person stated that the government was unwilling to evaluate itself about how its policies were working on the ground.
A lot of those promoting the policies really believed in them, believed they were doing positive work.
But the government will not talk to local people about the projects nor openly discuss their criticisms.
In fact, it was suggested that if one criticised the policies, then one was seen by government to be destructive.
However, everyone needed to have a chance of input into the policies.
There had to be a united voice on the policies, particularly from local community groups.
In relation to accountability, the role of the Catholic church seemed a particular cause for concern.
One participant argued that the church was a willing agent for the Northern Ireland Office in its attempts to marginalise Sinn Féin in the area.
Another participant agreed; the church is not accountable.
There can be no control over how its decisions are made for it is not democratic.
Making Belfast Work money is allowing the church to create and expand its empire.
Given all this criticism, the obvious question to try to answer was whether there was more than hype to Making Belfast Work, whether there was anything valuable in it.
One participant argued that it had potential, but that that potential was not being used to the full.
There was indeed money coming into the area, but was it being used effectively and in the best manner?
For example, the Rupert Stanley College of Further Education at Whiterock, where the conference was taking place, had to wait for Making Belfast Work money before it was set up.
This money should have been made available anyway.
Despite these criticisms, many were in agreement that Whiterock College was indeed one of the success stories of Making Belfast Work.
In fact, it showed Making Belfast Work at its best, funding an innovative project which later became part of mainstream funding.
BAT was also put forward as another success story.
There are limits to what BAT can achieve, but within those limits to what BAT can achieve, but within those limits it is flexible.
It can take greater risks than normal government departments would do.
However, even these success stories put forward by some participants were quickly followed by specific criticisms from other participants.
For example, one contributor argued that mainstream funding for Whiterock College was a case of robbing Peter to pay Paul.
Now the Board had to pay for Whiterock College, this could mean reducing the budget all around for other Colleges.
As for BAT, one contributor responded by arguing that it was simply a device established by the government to deflect community criticism.
Another participant stated that although there were any number of matters in relation to Making Belfast Work about which criticisms could be made, you cannot bite off the hand which feeds you.
At least there is money coming into the area.
We should use what we have got coming in more effectively and campaign for more money.
In the end there were a number of points of difference between participants in the workshop, in particular in relation to the stress on the political intent behind Making Belfast Work and on the enthusiasm with which the success of Making Belfast Work was supported.
Despite that, there were two points which were agreed by a majority of participants.
The first was the conclusion that the government needed an overall strategy for economic development in West Belfast, but that Making Belfast Work did not constitute such a strategy.
The second point was that the lack of accountability in schemes under the Making Belfast Work programme was an important reason to be concerned about Making Belfast Work.
Workshop F: Disabled People and the Labour Market
Chaired by Seán Maguire
Recorded by Seán Maguire
There is a dire need to put all the rhetoric on disability issues into practice.
All the workshops at the conference should have had a ‘disability aspect’, to get away from labelling and slotting disabled people into pigeon holes.
For example, the issues, such as problems with government's community care policies, could have been highlighted.
Much confusion and ‘disinformation’ prevail concerning the issue of people retaining entitlement to benefits whilst participating in training schemes such as Training Links (Worknet).
There is need for increased training for DHSS staff and other state employees to ensure there is an adequate dissemination of information of this nature.
However, before disabled people can even begin to consider training schemes or employment, many hurdles have to be approached to weigh the disadvantages and advantages.
These issues are: loss of benefits, reassessment for benefits (e.g. invalidity benefit and attendance allowance), physical access, transport and many other physical and financial obstacles which prevent disabled people entering or re-entering the labour market.
It was felt that if people managed to overcome the above obstacles, a support programme and a transitionary period are necessary to make entering employment successful.
There is potential for confidence to be shattered by simple issues, such as physical access.
Customised training and employment facilities to respond to all disabilities are essential.
Employers, training agencies and the wider society require education on disability issues.
If necessary, coercion may be necessary to ensure that these issues are addressed.
No legal framework prevails to enable disabled people to counteract discrimination, unfair employment practices, problems of access, etc.
However, it was pointed out that legal redress isn't always obtainable, discrimination against women being an analogy.
With these issues in mind, it was felt that a disability forum is essential, which must involve disabled people, to place all these problems on the political agenda.
Europe and America were referred to as examples of strong disability lobbies.
The issue of disability culture was highlighted, with the role of disabled people viewed as being isolated away from wider society.
Segregation in education and employment is a growing problem.
The integration of disabled people into everyday life is necessary to raise self-esteem and to counter stereotypes and attitudes which are often pre-conceived notions of ‘the handicapped’.
Projects in Dublin were referred to which obtained funds from Europe.
Similar projects could be implemented in the North if coordination prevailed on the interrelated problems.
It was pointed out that the Northern Ireland Council on Disability was in the process of investigating the services different agencies are providing for disabled people — not just in relation to physical access, but also in relation to access to the network of information on different services and projects which exclude disability interests.
Again, people in the workshop felt that the many issues connected to disability could have been incorporated into the discussion in the other workshops.
It was felt that such an approach would be a step towards addressing the marginalisation of disability issues.
In response to the conference title, ‘Is West Belfast Working?’, the consensus reached in this workshop was that the issue of disabled people working was not being addressed by Making Belfast Work.
Although the Disability Resource project is funded under the Making Belfast Work initiative, this is a very small and indirect approach.
Money would have to be designated for creating employment for disabled people.
In conclusion, a consensus prevailed that a group would have to be formed, consisting of disabled people in West Belfast, to make an impression and lobby on social policy and legal questions on the diverse needs of disabled people.
All the participants indicated that their respective  text missing?
Workshop G: What is a Real Job?
Chaired by Kevin O'Carroll
Recorded by Kevin O'Carroll
This workshop had only five participants, but this did not stop a lively exchange of views which didn't necessarily stick to the questions asked by the organisers of the conference.
The workshop began with a discussion about whether everyone had the right to a paid job.
The view was expressed that with technological progress unskilled jobs were disappearing and the idea that full employment is possible no longer makes any sense.
Only jobs that produced profit were realistic.
Suddenly we realised we were discussing question 5!
Others questioned the fact that it is unskilled jobs that are disappearing and suggested that workers are, in general, being deskilled in manufacturing industry.
The idea that only manufacturing jobs create profit was also challenged and it was suggested that there are many jobs needing to be done in West Belfast — teachers, nurses, creche workers, etc. — which are valuable and contribute, indirectly, to the production of profit.
But Mrs. Thatcher and Company wouldn't see it like that, it was agreed.
It's only if jobs produced profit directly that they would consider workers deserve to be paid.
On the first question, about how the media represent contemporary unemployment and job creation, there was unanimity that they are doing a snow job.
Unemployment (question 2) was falling slightly, but real jobs are not being created in West Belfast and its environs.
There then followed a discussion about the way in which West Belfast (like Derry) was coming to be seen as a big shopping mall.
It was agreed that retail/service jobs provided neither a stable base for the economy nor decent jobs for the people of the area.
Such jobs tend to be low paid, mainly employing non-unionised women for long hours with a high rate of exploitation.
It was suggested that better training might help bring about some change.
At present, YTP courses are training people for jobs that aren't there or else training them in customer contact skills.
Then, when a firm like Montupet comes into the area, they have to look outside West Belfast for a workforce with the skills they need.
This illustrates the need for effective skills training, but it was agreed that such training had to be voluntary and should provide some incentive to encourage unemployed people to take it up.
It was noted that the traditional idea of a real job tended to stress manual skilled work, done by men in a manufacturing industry.
‘Jobs a man can take pride in.’
It was agreed that a real job gives fair wages, is meaningful, secure and has ‘prospects’.
A fair or decent wage was defined as enough to allow workers to pay the bills, eat and clothe themselves and their dependants and to participate fully in society.
The question of whether service jobs are real jobs or whether only manufacturing jobs create wealth and so are the only real jobs was again posed and it was agreed that it was wrong to define wealth-producing as only having got to do with manufacturing and producing profit.
Bringing up children, making sick people well, educating the next generation of workers, etc. all add to the wealth in society and ARE real jobs.
They do create wealth, but wealth that Thatcher and Co. want to cream off without paying anything in return.
It was agreed that the IDB and LEDU don't do enough — only 40% on average of the jobs announced have ever come on stream; only 11% of jobs with American firms actually materialise.
The point was made that jobs ‘promoted’ were not a true count of REAL jobs; what we needed to know was the true job completion rate effected for what length of time — actual jobs and how long they lasted.
In this context the question of jobs being created by West Belfast people themselves inevitably arose, but there was a general lack of hope given the effect of political vetting on community economic initiatives.
The Springvale Enterprise Park held out greater promise because it is mixed Catholic and Protestant and so the government might be willing to fund it.
However, we agreed that self-help schemes could only bring a few jobs and that a central demand should still be that the state provide jobs.
On whether trade unions are doing enough about unemployment, the answer was generally no.
It was suggested that the best way for trade unions to fight unemployment was to defend already existing jobs that are under threat — for example, to fight redundancies in Mackies and to strike against privatisation in the hospitals and schools.
Others felt that the trade unions can do very little and that people don't look to them.
Trade unions are demoralised, have no clearly defined purpose anymore; they are inefficient and ineffective, it was argued by some.
The influence of trade unions lay not in their numbers alone but in the strength and cogency of their arguments.
In response, it was argued that the denigration of the role of trade unions was part of the Thatcher ethos of focusing on the individual rather than the collective.
The experience of Maydown Precision Engineering in Derry was quoted as an example of trade unions being relevant in fighting unemployment.
There the workers occupied their factory when the multinational company Molins announced its closure.
They had the (grudging) backing of their union and the pressure of their occupation ensured that the company left the machinery which allowed the workers to save 180 jobs.
There is no doubt that the strong union organisation in the factory, which forced the union to back them, made the difference in saving the jobs.
Workshop H: Are Health and Housing Needs a Source of Jobs?
Chaired by Philip Watt
Recorded by Danny Power
The numbers attending the workshop were small but the workshop covered in its membership a good cross-section of the community, from people with trade union experience to others working on housing, disability and community economic development.
Some background information on housing in West Belfast was provided, including the figures of housing waiting lists and some information on the poor levels of disrepair.
Other information also provided highlighted the link made between ill health and poor housing by recent reports made on housing estates in West Belfast.
Other information provided on the provision and maintenance of travellers' sites also proved to be a damning indictment of official neglect and racism.
The list of questions provided beforehand proved to be a useful aid and stimulant to the discussion.
The first part of the discussion concentrated on the present situation in the Royal Victoria Hospital (RVH).
The following is a summary of the main points:
It was stated that the standards in the RVH were dropping.
Cutbacks were being made in the provision of security which were leading to more cars being stolen and also placing an extra burden on the families who were visiting sick or loved ones.
The catchment area covered by the RVH was fairly large but this had not been reflected in the provision of funding, and in particular there were cutbacks in the numbers of specialist operations.
There were also cutbacks in the numbers of beds provided and, as a result, some people who had major operations had been released from hospital after only three days.
In past operational plans the Eastern Health and Social Services Board had stressed that efficiency and flexibility would need to be introduced.
It was suggested in the workshop that this does not or should not necessarily mean a cutback in the budget.
There were other complaints concerning the treatment of nurses.
There were problems aired, including the fact that nurses after training are not employed due to the cutbacks and are not allowed as a result to get the six months experience needed to get another job.
This had resulted in auxiliary nurses being left in many cases to carry the workload virtually on their own, with trainee nurses not able or qualified to do the work, due to no fault of their own.
This had left a problem in raising public awareness about the shortage because people saw a lot of nurses (mainly trainees) around the RVH; but they are not all qualified to carry out the work.
It was felt that the government was not sincere in the implementation of community care because they mention community care in the same breath as cutbacks.
It was felt that was totally contradictory as community care was more expensive and required a lot more time and resources if it was to be quality care.
It was also pointed out that there were cuts in the community care, in particular the home help budget, with home helps being restricted in the chores that they are allowed to carry out by law.
Home helps felt that they are being legally bound not to care!
It was also pointed out that some ACE schemes were carrying out community care projects which in reality meant a cheap community care programme with inexperienced carers.
It was stressed that full time staff were needed for old people, especially in terms of building up a relationship with the old people which would mean that the help would be more efficient and effective.
It was generally agreed that there was a rundown in the entire welfare state, mainly because it was a service and not a profit-making enterprise.
The workshop also stressed that there needs to be an awareness built into the local communities that their health service was being attacked.
The trade unions have been largely silent and it was felt that the media had a lot to answer for in this department.
The next part of the meeting concentrated on the link between poor housing and ill health and a number of reports were commented upon as evidence of a clear link existing in this area.
Reports included the Divis/Twinbrook study and the Moyard study.
Again a number of points were made and the following represented the main points.
For the past number of years there have been severe cutbacks in the housing budget.
There exists in West Belfast a chronic housing shortage and poor levels of disrepair, some of the worst in the North of Ireland.
In one district in West Belfast, according to recent Housing Executive figures, 570 housing applications out of a total of 813 are in ‘urgent housing need’.
There has been a substantial cutback in the direct labour scheme operated by the Housing Executive (NIHE); this had resulted in an increased usage of contract firms.
It was further felt that in some cases the lowest tender tended to gain the contract at the expense of better quality work because of the financial restrictions the Housing Executive Board have allowed to be placed on them.
It was felt that central government was at the core of many of the problems, but also to be considered was the mis-management of the NIHE Board and their failure to properly consult and allow the full participation of the tenants themselves, who more often than not are the best experts needed.
There were problems expressed about the difficulties of people with disabilities and those in ill-health to have necessary adaptations made to their homes, again mainly due to financial considerations rather than on the tenants' needs.
There were concerns raised as to the sincerity of central government when at the same time as the cutbacks and increased homelessness they were building large shopping centres e.g. Castle Court.
It was agreed that there needed to be substantial funding restored to both the Housing Executive and health service budget to improve the services they provide and to combat the ever increasing problems which are besetting our community.
There needs to be a substantial change in government policy towards service organisations.
They are not profit making organisations but are providing an essential service to the community.
There needs to be accountability injected into the government structures to take into account and actively implement local opinion.
Workshop I: What Does the Fair Employment Act mean for West Belfast?
Chaired by Eileen Duffy
Recorded by Eileen Duffy
The purpose of the workshop was to examine the 1989 Fair Employment Act and assess its capacity to counter the structural nature of discrimination in West Belfast.
The discussion began with the assertion that, despite the 1989 Act, discrimination in the workplace will continue.
With discretion, employers determined not to employ Catholics can continue to discriminate because of the weaknesses in the Act.
The Northern Ireland Office admits that discrimination will not be fully counteracted.
In response, it was stated that, while no one can give a 100% guarantee on employment discrimination, the Fair Employment Commission would continue to take up cases where employers were discriminating and would win.
This raised the question of sections 42 and 57 of the 1976 Act which weaken the powers of investigation by the Fair Employment Commission.
Section 57, for example, protects employers who discriminate on the grounds that the employee or potential employee holds certain political opinions.
As there is no onus of proof on the employer, this section reinforces structural discrimination against the people of West Belfast.
Any investigation can be stopped on the grounds of ‘national security’.
It was admitted that this section worried the Fair Employment Commission, even though it was seldom used by employers.
Where this does happen, employers must accept that they are discriminating.
Regarding section 42, it was felt that recent moves by the Fair Employment Commission to challenge this through the High Court will have an effect, if only to force the government to justify its use of this section.
Other participants in the workshop were not convinced.
It was felt that there were many worrying aspects to the legislation.
When section 42 was under discussion, the government ignored recommendations made by the Fair Employment Agency, as well as recommendations in the Standing Advisory Commission on Human Rights (SACHR) report of 1987.
Here the case of contract compliance was cited.
The SACHR felt it should be used as an incentive to good practice rather than as a weapon after an employer had been found guilty of a criminal offence (discrimination).
A large question mark hangs over the government's intention to ever use contract compliance.
In relation to affirmative action, it was felt that the Act is very unclear about what is and what is not permitted.
The SACHR said that affirmative action should go as far as positive discrimination, e.g. the tie break, but this is not in the legislation.
Despite Tom King's claims that there is a fine distinction between the two, both the 1976 Act and the 1989 Act will only produce marginal change.
In the same vein, it was stated that it is a major disappointment that employers are not encouraged to give jobs to the long-term unemployed under the Act.
Training for the long-term unemployed is permitted, however.
The discussion then centred on jobs and training in West Belfast.
It was felt that training in West Belfast under YTP and JTP did not prepare people, especially the young, for jobs in industry and was not geared towards getting work.
The 1989 Act needed to be much firmer, with a time limit imposed, if government is serious about equalising the workforce.
The question was asked in relation to training: can people compete equally if they do not start from the same vantage point?
One participant involved in training said people here have low self-esteem and must contend with almost daily harassment.
Training on offer at present centres mainly on the retailing services where jobs are mostly part-time and aimed at women.
There is no real industrial based training.
Also raised was the quality of training available at Boucher Road.
The kind of high tech.
training available in the East Belfast centres is not offered in this part of the city.
It was also pointed out that when Montupet set up close to West Belfast, Richard Needham claimed it would bring up to 1000 new jobs to West Belfast.
Yet Montupet is recruiting people from a heavy engineering background to train for their new plant.
The people of West Belfast, because of decades of discrimination, do not have such an industrial background.
Training which is job related must be provided in West Belfast in skills traditionally denied to the Catholic population.
People in West Belfast are very cynical about the claims made on job creation in the area.
One participant felt the lack of real jobs was a political weapon used against the people of West Belfast.
Another said that the location of industry and Government Training Centres had to be looked at in terms of equal opportunity and access.
Those closest to West Belfast were located in areas where Catholics had been and still were being murdered.
The relocation of Mackies to Woodvale is an example of jobs moving to a high risk area without protest from those supporting equality of opportunity.
It was generally felt that the legislation was nothing more than a publicity exercise, carried out under severe pressure from the USA and the Free State government.
It had nothing to do with social justice.
Working class people in general find it hard to go to court, and the people in West Belfast have no faith in the legal system anyway.
The young in West Belfast know their rights in relation to the RUC and British army, but they do not know their rights in relation to jobs.
Employers on the other hand have access to advice and finance to help them know their rights and obligations.
One participant claimed that when he used his West Belfast address in job applications he had no replies, but when he used an outside address he did receive replies.
He felt it was this type of blanket discrimination against West Belfast which the legislation fails to address and any serious attempt to end discrimination must contain positive discrimination and quotas.
Another participant raised the issue of the ‘chill factor’ and wanted to know what employers were doing to counter this.
It was pointed out that the relocation of Mackies would create just such conditions and eventually the minority workforce will be disposed of.
The workshop was anxious to know what advice will be given to Mackies to deal with such a situation.
The 1976 and 1989 Acts do not address fully sectarian harassment and discrimination.
While there had been some improvements in terms of flags and emblems, young people still do not apply for work in unsafe areas because of the serious risks involved.
It was felt that the state does not want to protect people and the legislation was nothing more than an exercise in buying time (something that the people of West Belfast haven't got).
It is not an attempt to get to grips with the fundamental problems of this society.
Finally the issue of employment rights was raised again.
Participants agreed that an agency which would inform people of these rights and would monitor the workings of the fair employment legislation was needed in West Belfast.
This agency should be funded as employers are given financial help to carry out their obligations under the legislation.
Workshop J: Social Security: Disciplining or Serving the Unemployed?
Chaired by Mairead Davey
Recorded by Kevin Rosato
The workshop opened by focusing on particular aspects of social security.
The question of the recently introduced Actively Seeking Work legislation was of major concern to everyone.
Details of this piece of legislation were discussed, and its effects on Northern Ireland claimants were analysed.
Statistical accounts of those whose benefits have been cut under the Actively Seeking Work legislation to date were provided.
It was generally agreed that this legislation could only be viewed as punitive, particularly in an area such as West Belfast, which is devoid of any real opportunities for employment.
It was further agreed that information and advice on Actively Seeking Work should be made widely available to claimants in West Belfast and that, wherever appropriate, the injustices of the legislation should be highlighted.
A second area of discussion was the general dissatisfaction at the treatment of both claimants and advisors by DHSS staff.
Individuals painted a pretty grim picture of the pressures within social security offices.
While they acknowledged severe staff shortages, increasing workloads and huge backlogs of work in the offices, they thought that the practice of sporadic strikes by staff were not having the desired effect on management, but were penalising the unemployed.
This can put a strain on the goodwill which usually exists between community workers and DHSS staff.
It was agreed that NIPSA should be pressured into changing the poor attitude many staff have towards claimants.
Some people thought that a wider look at the problem may provide some answers.
It was agreed that DHSS staff are constrained by legislation which is intrinsically unjust, and as such continual conflict between staff and claimants will result.
Also, how unemployed people were presented in the media was criticised; however it was agreed that this image was merely a reflection of the views of the Tory government.
Unemployed people are described as lazy, scroungers, living off the tax payer, etc.
Claiming benefit can often be a degrading experience and it would appear that this is the effect desired.
It was pointed out that social security offices present an oppressive atmosphere, lacking basic amenities such as toilets, nursing rooms for mothers, etc.
It was agreed that community groups should give some thought to campaigning to have these facilities installed.
The plight of the young was also discussed.
It was felt that the withdrawal of benefit from 16 and 17 year olds was a regressive step.
Limiting the options of the young, by forcing them either to remain dependent on their families or to join YTP or JTP schemes, was unacceptable.
JTPs are operating in a vacuum, with some schemes attempting to provide quality training while constrained by inadequate funds and overloaded by bureaucratic paper work.
The view was expressed that YTP and JTP are no substitute for the creation of real employment for young people.
In conclusion, it was agreed that we ought not view social security legislation in isolation, but should consider the effects on the unemployed of this legislation and other legislation introduced during the eleven years of Tory government, such as housing, health, education.
It was felt that the main objective of the Tory government has been to discipline the unemployed and to lay the blame for their unemployment on them rather than on government economic policy.
SECTION THREE
PLENARY SESSION
Plenary Session
Introduction
The intention of the conference organisers was that the plenary session would be an unstructured, open debate.
No attempt was made, therefore, to have a formal feed-back from the Workshops.
What follows is a summary of the key themes which emerged from the plenary session.
The Chair of the plenary session, Inez McCormack opened the afternoon session by relaying some messages to the conference.
Messages of support were received from many people including: AFL-CIO, the Mayor of Boston, Ray Flynn, Elizabeth Holtzman, Comptroller of New York and Paul O'Dwyer, U.N.
Commissioner.
Apologies were received from Councillor Joe Hendron.
In opening up the debate to the floor, Inez stressed hopes for democratic discussion, respect for differing and varying views.
Training
There was a lively debate around the issue of training which had already started in the workshop in the morning.
While many people expressed dissatisfaction and anger with government training policies, some argued that current training policies can be used fruitfully by and for local people.
The latter argument, noted that there is bad training as well as good.
But, given that there is government money available for training, the local community should have more say about what type of training is needed and who gives it.
Others felt that there weren't adequate funds available for training, and that current government policies are the latest attempt at doctoring unemployment statistics for the area.
Indeed, some people questioned the whole trend in making such training courses compulsory and making welfare benefits dependent on attendance at training courses.
Concern was also expressed about the lack of rights for trainees — they often find themselves in a vulnerable situation.
A trainee who feels that their training course is inadequate has often no option but to continue on the training course or find themselves in a position of having their benefits cut.
Finally it was pointed out that most of the training did not meet the needs of specific groupings in the community such as women, people with disabilities and Travellers.
Government Initiatives
In recent years there has been a major media hype about the supposed increase of government funding of initiatives in West Belfast.
This was mentioned by a number of speakers.
The money they are putting back in is money they are taking out, through cuts in funding of the Royal Hospital, the Home Help service, the social fund and the health service in general.
Government policy
Much debate  centred around the lack of coherent policies for the area and dissatisfaction with the perceived motivation behind those policies that do exist.
Some people felt that what West Belfast needs is the development of an industrial base rather than the current proliferation of shopping centres.
While it was argued that these centres create jobs, can help create a better image for the area and provide shopping facilities locally, many expressed concern that the jobs provided are part-time and low paid and go no way towards creating a sound economic base in the community.
Negative Image
The whole question of the ‘negative image’ of West Belfast was raised with some arguing that this image would need to be tackled as a prerequisite to further economic development in the area.
Others agreed that there is a negative image but it is within the N.I.O. and the job creation agencies and has more to do with political prejudice than anything else.
It was argued that industrialists are not encouraged to come into West Belfast by various Government agencies.
‘They create the bad image because they have a politically biased view of the area and the people within it’.
The whole question of ‘negative image’ is not specific to West Belfast, it affects the whole of the North of Ireland.
But within the North some areas get the resources to enable them to develop economically while others don't.
Motivation
The motivation of government economic policies for West Belfast was criticised.
‘Their motivation is suspect and there is a concern that they are trying to buy off nationalist community support and in particular support for Sinn Féin in the West of the city’.
There was also some concern expressed about the Catholic Church's involvement in job creation schemes.
It was argued that they can monopolise resources in an area where they already do have a monopoly (schools, community halls, etc.)
The church is using state money rather than their own money and it was felt that the church had become another agency of the state in this regard.
Accountability
There are no mechanisms for public accountability in relation to government initiatives.
People articulated the need for local community attempts to make government and other agencies concerned with economic issues accountable.
‘So, we are really talking, I believe, about developing democracy and accountability and power for people at the very grassroots of the community’.
One speaker from the floor summed up this whole discussion on government initiatives.
‘Unemployment in West Belfast didn't just happen last year or the year before in  or 1969…
We need public funding, we need big money, big schemes, big training and real jobs’.
Other Areas
Speakers from different areas including Derry, Brownlow, and the Lower Ormeau made contributions.
The similarities between these areas were striking — long term unemployment, increasing dependence on decreasing social welfare rates, low wage economy, and dependence on training schemes.
Alongside this reality people in these areas experienced similar media hype to that about West Belfast, with promises of a bright future where economic problems diminish daily.
Women
What was referred to as the ‘second kind of discrimination in West Belfast’ i.e. discrimination against women was a recurring theme.
The point was made that while it was valuable to have a specific workshop to deal with the issue of women, all the other workshops and all the topics discussed should have a clear women's perspective.
It was argued that ‘West Belfast is not working for women’.
Not only is there no government strategy for economic development for women but the current government policies attack the existing rights of women.
It was pointed out that women in West Belfast who are in employment are in low paid, part-time, temporary jobs.
Also women are invisible in the unemployment statistics and it was felt that this needs to be addressed.
Government policies generally and employment and training schemes in particular do not take women into account.
Lack of childcare provision was cited as a major obstacle for women who wish to participate in training and employment initiatives.
Discrimination
Different forms of discrimination were examined.
Structural discrimination was high on the agenda.
Many felt that the Fair Employment (N.I.) Act 1989 ‘doesn't even recognise the existence of structural discrimination.
But it exists and we all know it exists.
Everybody knows it exists.’
Indeed some felt given the success of the MacBride lobby in the U.S., that the Act is aimed at getting the issue off the agenda.
Travellers, a minority grouping within West Belfast were cited as a group who experience discrimination and racism.
It was pointed out that not only government agencies but also the local settled community discriminate against them.
It is now acceptable to oppose discrimination against women and people with disabilities, but the issue of discrimination against Travellers needs to be put firmly on the agenda.
A member of the organising committee who had attended the workshop on disability raised the question of lack of access to all parts of the conference venue to people with disabilities.
He apologised on behalf of the organising committee that not all of the workshops were accessible to people with disabilities and assured the participants that any further conferences organised would ensure that this would not happen again.
ACE and the Catholic Church
A number of concerns relating specifically to ACE were raised.
The church control of ACE schemes was an issue of concern for many people.
It was felt that the Catholic church is an inappropriate organisation to be controlling ACE schemes given its lack of democratic structures.
Generally it was felt that there was a lack of quality control of ACE schemes being quite good but the majority being of poor quality with poor working conditions, bad pay and often inadequate training.
ACE and the voluntary sector
The voluntary sector is a large employer of ACE schemes and now relies heavily on it for its funding.
In addition the scheme is open to political control and administrative abuse.
The prime example of political control is the government's Action for Community Employment scheme.
RESOLUTION
In bringing the discussion to a conclusion, the Chair drew attention to the following resolution which had been prepared by the organising committee prior to the conference and circulated to all participants on registration (see Appendix 3 for full text):
‘This conference calls upon the ‘Is West Belfast Working?’
Conference Group as follows:
1)
To produce and distribute a report on the ‘Is West Belfast Working?’
Conference.
2)
To seek meetings with interested parties, governmental and otherwise to express the concerns of the conference.
3)
To monitor the impact of government economic and social policies and special employment and training measures on the people of West Belfast.
4)
To inform and encourage debate within local communities on current policies and future development.
5)
To recall the ‘Is West Belfast Working?’
Conference within two years.’
Resolution Debate
The main reaction to the resolution was that it was too weak and lacked a general objective for the Conference Group to pursue.
Eventually, a proposal was put forward to amend the resolution by adding the following:
6) To support the creation of real jobs and the economic regeneration of West Belfast.
The amendment was accepted and then the complete resolution was voted on and unanimously accepted.
Closing Speeches
Speaker after speaker congratulated the organisers, expressed their satisfaction with the conference and talked about how necessary a forum like this was.
Because it was organised by local people rather than a government agency it ensured a wide attendance of local people and created an atmosphere in which serious debate could take place.
Quite a number of speakers stressed the importance of events like this to bring people together and to help us recognise our collective strengths.
It was interesting to note that given the diversity of political opinions that such a strong consensus could exist around the issue of government economic initiatives for the area.
APPENDICES
Appendix 1: List of Participants
Note
While the organisers tried to keep track of all those who attended the conference, many people came and went after the initial registration period.
For this reason the list below is not complete, and we apologise to those who attended but whose names we failed to record.
Appendix 2: Workshop Discussion Guidelines
WORKSHOP A: IDB, LEDU AND THE IFI: DEVELOPING WEST BELFAST?
1.
Do the economic development agencies discriminate against West Belfast, and if so, how?
2.
Are the investments of these agencies helping to challenge or reinforce the historic sectarian divisions within the labour market?
3.
What new sources of information are needed to measure the social and economic performance of the development agencies?
4.
What are the implications of the government's latest ‘economic strategy’ announcement?
5.
How can the development agencies contribute to the employment prospects of West Belfast residents both inside and outside of the area?
WORKSHOP B: WHAT IS TRAINING FOR?
A. GENERAL
1.
If high unemployment continues what good is training to most people in West Belfast?
Would not a massive increase of jobs ensure that training be integrated to economic revival and be more productive in finding work?
Do YTP and ACE of themselves generate economic activity significant to the scale of the problems?
2.
Is the proliferation of training schemes and employment agencies merely a move a) to reduce unemployment statistics b) to make it seem that the government is doing something without it having to positively intervene economically in a massive problem?
B. YOUTH TRAINING
1.
Does YTP train people for non-existent jobs?
Why are statistics not kept of trainees whose employers give them full-time jobs later?
Would the figures show that overall training does not reduce unemployment generally?
2.
What percentage of young people refuse to start or complete a YTP placement?
Why are records not kept of this?
3.
Is the government's new ‘block funding’ of YTP a move to put YTP workshops on a commercial footing, requiring them to make a ‘profit’to survive?
Will future funding be reduced to force the workshops in that direction?
Did the new scheme come from the philosophy of government's financial managers to save money rather than from the YTP providers themselves?
4.
What would quality training for youth look like?
C. ADULT TRAINING
1.
Are JTP and ACE a form of cheap labour?
Is their main purpose to reduce the unemployment statistics?
2.
What does the training element of ACE achieve in the longer-term?
Can any employment rights be extended to ACE workers?
3.
Do employers use JTP as cheap labour?
Is ACE any different?
4.
How does positive and negative political vetting operate in relation to ACE?
What are the effects of vetting?
5.
What adult training do we want?
D. FURTHER EDUCATION
1.
How can further education help in economic development?
2.
What needs and demands for further education need to be resourced?
WORKSHOP C: WHAT CAN COMMUNITY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ACHIEVE?
1.
Is Community Economic Development merely a means of shifting the responsibilities for unemployment, deprivation etc., onto the deprived themselves or is it an acceptance that government economic policy has failed so-called deprived areas and that something new is needed?
2.
Is Community Economic Development a means of privatising poverty and promoting self-exploitation?
3.
What is the relationship between Community Economic Development and the government's economic policy?
4.
Does government have a community economic development strategy?
If so, what are its aims and objectives?
5.
How are ACE, YTP, JTP, Community Workshops, LEP, BAT, MBW a means of achieving those aims and objectives, and are these programmes perceived as a means of meeting the community's needs and interests?
6.
What models in addition to private enterprise are there for Community Economic Development?
7.
What role can/should people play in the regeneration of their own areas?
8.
How can this process be facilitated?
9.
What can realistically be accomplished by Community Economic Development strategies and what criteria can be used to determine and evaluate success?
WORKSHOP D: HOW CAN EMPLOYMENT FOR WOMEN BE DEVELOPED?
EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES ISSUES AND JOB CREATION
1.
How do existing training and employment policies discriminate against women?
a)
YTP?
b)
JTP?
c)
ACE?
d)
Enterprise Allowance?
e)
Job Clubs, Job Markets & Community Employment Agency
f)
Are IFI, IDB, LEDU male job creators?
2.
How does Social Security provision work against women participating in work or training?
3.
What changes are needed to meet women's aspirations for employment?
a)
training provision
b)
social security
c)
child care facilities, communal and/or work-based
d)
economic development agencies
e)
further education
f)
other services/issues
WORKSHOP E: MAKING BELFAST WORK OR MAKING THE UNDERCLASS?
1.
What is the philosophy behind Making Belfast Work?
2.
Where is the money coming from and what is it spent on?
3.
How is West Belfast benefiting from Making Belfast Work?
4.
What is the role of the Belfast Action Teams?
5.
In what ways are community groups and others in West Belfast contributing to the formation and implementation of policy?
6.
How is the programme being monitored?
7.
Can Making Belfast Work be improved or should it be shut down to make way for alternative policies?
WORKSHOP F: WHAT DOES THE LABOUR MARKET OFFER PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES?
1.
How do existing training and employment policies discriminate against people with disabilities?
a)
YTP
b)
JTP
c)
ACE
d)
Enterprise Allowance
e)
Job Clubs, Job Markets & Community Employment Agency
f)
IFI, IDB, LEDU
2.
How does social security provision affect the possibility of people with disabilities participating in work or training?
3.
How does physical access to, and within, buildings affect people's access to employment, training, education and leisure?
4.
What are the effects of stereotyping and discriminating against people with disabilities?
5.
What changes are needed to enable people with disabilities to enter the labour market?
a)
physical access
b)
social security
c)
childcare facilities
d)
transport
e)
carers
f)
physical needs
g)
education for disabled people
h)
education for non-disabled people
i)
education for employment and training bodies.
WORKSHOP G: WHAT IS A REAL JOB?
1.
How do media represent contemporary unemployment and job creation.
2.
Is unemployment falling and are real jobs being created in West Belfast (or outside of West Belfast which people from the area have access to)?
3.
What do we mean by ‘real jobs’, ‘meaningful work’ and ‘decent employment’?
a)
pay
b)
hours
c)
rights
d)
conditions
e)
social
4.
Are the trade unions doing enough about unemployment?
5.
Is ‘full employment’ possible?
WORKSHOP H: ARE HEALTH AND HOUSING NEEDS A SOURCE OF JOBS?
1.
How have jobs at the RVH been affected by NHS cuts, by privatisation plans and by ‘Working for Patients’?
2.
What possibilities exist for the expansion of health service employment at the Royal Victoria Hospital?
3.
Are new health policies (and services) needed for West Belfast and if so, what?
4.
Does the standard of housing reflect on the standard of health?
Divis Twinbrook Moyard
5.
What type of jobs exist and should exist in the housing field? direct labour? sub-contractors should the Housing Executive employ local firms to do work in West Belfast? does the Housing Executive's tendering policy fairly treat the local labour force?
6.
Is there a repairs problem in West Belfast? how does the repairs system operate at the present time? is the policy of employing contractors for repairs adequate? are tenants rights safeguarded in the tendering policy of the Housing Executive in regards to accountability to the community and the standard of work carried out?
7.
What have been the effects of cutbacks to the Housing Executive budget? loss of jobs poorer quality of repairs employment of lowest tender firms lack of adequate re-building programme increasing waiting list homelessness rundown of other services offered by the Housing Executive
8.
How can jobs be created by the housing sector in West Belfast? increase overall budget to include expansion of re-build programme, upgrading of repairs service? should there be positive discrimination in favour of the local workforce on schemes taking place in West Belfast?
9.
What can be done about discrimination against Travellers, given that travelling people in the Glen Road have been denied the fundamental right of official halting sites which should have been provided by Belfast City Council?
WORKSHOP I: WHAT DOES THE FAIR EMPLOYMENT ACT MEAN FOR WEST BELFAST?
1.
Why did the government produce a new Fair Employment Act (1989)?
2.
What is different about this Act compared to 1976?
3.
In what ways is the legislation regarded as being weak by critics?
4.
Can the effectiveness of the new legislation be assessed adequately in the short-term?
5.
How does the Act help West Belfast workers?
WORKSHOP J: SOCIAL SECURITY: DISCIPLINING OR SERVING THE UNEMPLOYED?
1.
In what ways have the social security rights of the unemployed been curtailed in recent years?
2.
Why has the government conducted fraud drives, instituted Restart and Actively Seeking Work?
3.
How is Actively Seeking Work operating in West Belfast compared to other areas?
4.
How can/should staff and claimants respond to recent policies?
Appendix 3: Resolution Document
‘Is West Belfast Working?’
Conference
WHITEROCK COLLEGE OF FURTHER EDUCATION, 2ND JUNE 1990
Proposal on the way forward
PREAMBLE
This conference provides the first opportunity in West Belfast itself for the unemployed, community groups, local business people, policy makers, managers and administrators of employment and training schemes, funders, careers teachers, trade unionists and others to discuss present and future employment prospects of people living in West Belfast.
The resolution below will be put to a vote at the final plenary.
STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLE
Mindful of Article 23 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948:
1.
Everyone has the right to work, to free choice of employment, to just and favourable conditions of work and to protection against unemployment.
2.
Everyone, without discrimination, has the right to equal pay for equal work.
3.
Everyone who works has the right to just and favourable remuneration ensuring for her/himself and family an existence worthy of human dignity, and supplemented, if necessary, by other means of social protection.
4.
Everyone has the right to form and join trade unions for the protection of her/his interests.
And mindful of the International Labour Organization's Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958:
that discrimination constitutes violation of rights enunciated by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
and that the term ‘discrimination’ includes any distinction, exclusion or preference made on the basis of race, colour, sex, religion, political opinion, national extraction or social origin, which has the effect of nullifying or impairing equality of opportunity or treatment in employment or occupation.
And mindful of the European Social Charter 1961 which calls on Contracting Parties:
to accept as one of their primary aims and responsibilities the achievement and maintenance of as high and stable a level of employment as possible, with a view to the attainment of full employment.
(Article 1.)
RESOLUTION
This conference calls upon the ‘Is West Belfast Working?’
Conference Group:
1.
To produce and distribute a report on the ‘Is West Belfast Working?’ conference.
2.
To seek meetings with interested parties, governmental and otherwise, to express the concerns of the conference.
3.
To monitor the impact of government economic and social policies, and of special employment and training measures on the people of West Belfast.
4.
To inform and encourage debate within local communities on current policies and future development.
5.
To re-call the ‘Is West Belfast Working?’ conference within two years.
Appendix 4: Media Coverage
Press statement issued by Conference Organisers
A campaign to monitor the impact of government economic and social policies in West Belfast was launched today at a well-attended conference in the Whiterock College of Further Education.
The conference, entitled ‘Is West Belfast Working?’, was organised by an ad hoc committee of local community groups and individuals.
It was attended by over 200 representatives of local community, tenants, unemployed, and political groups.
The speakers who addressed the conference were Oliver Kearney for Springhill Community House, David Bass of the Milltown Action Team, Bob Cooper of the Fair Employment Commission, Liam Parker of Worknet, Alisdair McDonnell of the Phoenix Trust, Stevie Johnston of Falls Community Council, Brendan McCarthy of the Joint Shop Stewards Committee Royal Victoria Hospital, Mary Clarke-Glass of the Equal Opportunities Commission, Laura McCartney of the Northern Ireland Council on Disability, Caitriona Ruane of the West Belfast Action for the Unemployed, Mike Tomlinson of Obair, and Liam McCarney of Glenand.
Following a day of workshops, discussion and contributions from the floor, the conference unanimously passed a resolution mandating the organisers to seek meetings with government and other interested parties to discuss the unemployment problem, and to monitor on an ongoing basis the impact of government economic and social policies.
Conference also called on the organisers to investigate strategies and tactics for the economic regeneration of West Belfast and the creation of meaningful jobs locally.
Representatives who attended from Derry, Craigavon and other areas expressed interest in organising similar conferences in their respective areas.
Inez McCormack of NUPE, who chaired the afternoon session, said that the very broad range of interests represented at conference highlighted the importance of the issue of employment creation in West Belfast.
Among those who attended were Gerry Adams, MP for West Belfast, the US vice-consul Cathy Hurst, Graham Gudgin, Director of the Northern Ireland Economic Research Centre, Dr. Liam O'Dowd of Queen's University, Belfast, along with many community activists, local councillors and representatives of political parties, including Lily Fitzsimmons, Sinn Féin, Alex Atwood, SDLP and Mary McMahon, Workers' Party.
The organisers claimed the conference was a resounding success.
Conference spokesperson Louise O'Meara said: ‘We believe that the fundamental issue of democratic accountability of government employment and training agencies has begun to be addressed.
This conference has initiated a process of community discussion which we hope will lead to a coherent strategy for the economic development of West Belfast.’