

Because there was nothing in Clara's past that would seem to have fitted her for such recognitions: she was not bred to it.
And when she reflected, as she frequently did, upon what she had been bred to, she was profoundly puzzled by her own origins.
Her birth, as far as she could see, had been accidental; no careful well-intended deity could have selected for her her own home.
But she did not like to admit the accidental, for if her birth was the effect of chance, so then was her escape; the same arbitrary law that had produced her might well have blinded her at the most crucial moments of her life, and left her forever desiring, forever missing, never achieving, an eternal misfit.
She had seen people like this.
She had no confidence that time would bring with it inevitable growth: she grew by will and by strain.
As a child, she was always deeply affected by the story of the sower who sowed his seeds, and some fell by the wayside, and some on stony ground and some fell among the thorns, and some fell upon good ground and bore fruit.
This story was a favourite of the headmistress of her primary school, so she heard it often at Morning Prayers, and long before she could see it as a parable, she already felt shock before its injustice.
The random scattering of seeds, and how much worse, of human souls, appalled her.
As she grew older, she looked upon herself, tragically, defiantly, with all the hopelessness of fourteen years, as a plant trying to root itself upon the solid rock, without water, without earth, without shade: and then, when a little older yet, when conscious of some growth, she had to concede that she must have fallen happily upon some small dry sandy fissure, where a few grains of sand, a few drops of moisture, had been enough to support her trembling and tenacious life.
Because she would live, she would survive.
It always amazed her to see that other people could live so comfortably upon such barren territory.
Northam was to her the very image of unfertile ground, and yet other people lived there and stayed there when they had money in the bank and legs to walk away on.
She hated her home town with such violence that when she returned each vacation from University, she would shake and tremble with an ashamed and feverish fear.
She hated it, and she was afraid of it, because she doubted her power to escape; even after two years in London, she still thought that her brain might go or that her nerve might snap, and that she would be compelled to return, feebly, defeated, to her mother's house.
She was so constantly braced, her will so stiff from desire, that she could not sleep at nights; she feared that if she fell asleep she might lose her determination and her faith, might wake up alone in her narrow bed, in the small back bedroom, overlooking the small square garden, backing onto the next small square garden, where for so many years she had lain and dreamed her subversive dreams.
She was frightened of this: and also she was frightened of her mother.
Her father was dead.
He was killed on a pedestrian crossing when Clara was sixteen.
Those who took an interest in Clara might have seen in his death the loss of an ally, because outwardly at least he appeared to be more intelligent than his wife; at least he did not scorn in public, as she did, all efforts of the mind, and all the aims of education.
But in fact he had never been particularly sympathetic towards Clara, and paid but a feeble and superficial attention to her progress.
He did not like children; he did not much like anything.
He took slightly more interest in his two sons, Arthur and Alan, but not through any natural preference for them; it was simply that with them he knew better what questions should be asked.
His work, which he pursued at the Town Hall, was never mentioned in the house, and as far as Clara could gather it was mathematical, highly respectable, and highly dull.
When people asked Mrs Maugham where her daughter got her brains from, she would sniff and shrug her shoulders and say, as though disclaiming a vice or a disease, "Well, she certainly didn't get them from me, she must have got them from him, I suppose" — a remark which Clara took years to place, in all its ambiguity, for the truth was that Mrs Maugham had done well at school, she had shone and  prospered, and the evidence of her distant triumphs still lay around the house in the form of inscribed Sunday school prizes.
But whatever talents she had once had, she had now turned ferociously against them, whereas her husband did still pay a curious self-willed homage to the intellectual virtues; he possessed an 1895 edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica which he would, from time to time, read.
He would also exhort his children to read it, and laid great stress upon the utility of information.
His own father had been a skilled mechanic (a phrase which conveyed little to Clara) and as he himself had managed to purchase by his own labours a three bedroomed semi-detached house in a pleasant suburban district, he might have been thought to have cause to feel fairly content with life.
But he did not.
He was perpetually in the grip of some obscure, niggling, unexplained bitterness, which led him to repudiate most of the overtures which Clara would from time to time make towards him; she made these attempts because she was less frightened of him than she was of her mother, and she did on one or two occasions — the purchase of a bicycle, permission to go to the cinema — manage to enlist his sympathies.
But she could see that his heart was not in it.
And truly, she could not blame him.
She could hardly bear to think the thought, but it did seem to her that anyone who had lived for so many years with her mother could be excused for a certain lack of joie de vivre.
When he died, she felt no real grief.
The only reality of the event had been her mother's reaction, which was silent, grim, and grudging to the last; not a tear did she shed, and after the funeral, as she turned away from the graveside and started to walk slowly through the cemetery mud she set her mouth in that prophetic way, and straightened her thick body, and then, as she passed a gravestone announcing that death is but a separation, she opened her mouth and said, "Well, he's gone, and I can't say I'm sorry." 
And Clara, walking by her side and hearing these words, burst suddenly and at last into loud hysterical weeping, and as the tears flooded down her hot cheeks she knew that they were not for her father, but for the meanness and the lack of love, and for the fear that she would die in so ugly a hole, and so unloved.
Nobody comforted her, for weeping was not necessary, but it was on the other hand permissible, and when she  got home the aunts and uncles were kind to her and offered her cups of tea.
Even her brothers were kind, though embarrassed and Clara, as she sat there picking endlessly at the fringe of the tablecloth, had a vision of some other world where violent emotion could be a thing of beauty, where even tears could be admitted and not ignored, where good taste in tomb stones consisted not in cheap restrained economy of design, fabric, and word, but of marble angels wildly grieving.
Anything, anything would make death tolerable, she thought, anything that could admit something of the grand somewhere, and not this small cramped sitting room, this domestic duplicity, this pouring of cups of tea, these harshly unaltered faces.
One tear would have sufficed her, one murmur of regret, but there was nothing; the family were not even in mourning, for they found the wearing of mourning a false and hypocritical extravagance.
They would admit nothing; they sat there like stones, and their one aim was to sit there like stones, so that no one could tell if they cared or did not care, so that there should be no difference between caring and not caring.
The funeral itself had been a grotesque manifestation of Mrs Maugham's opinions.
She had refused to have her husband cremated, not because she had anything so fanciful as a religious objection to cremation, but because she quite erroneously considered cremation to be a new-fangled idea, and she objected to the new.
She had been brought up as a chapel-goer, and two generations back her family had been staunch Wesleyans, but she herself had long since dropped any pretence to faith of any kind, and now considered all religious observation as ridiculous frivolity.
However, she maintained the moral impetus of her early years, although she had quite cast off its derivations and turned her back upon its fraudulent source; the narrow fervours and disapprovals were there, but their objects had subtly altered over the years.
So that the wearing of mourning, fifty years earlier a sign of virtue, had now in Mrs Maugham's generation become a habit to be scorned and condemned; it was ostentatious and therefore it was insincere.
And her dislike of the insincere ran so deep that she would rather publicly disclaim all grief for her dead husband than be accused of insincerity.
But it took a trained observer to follow her through the quicksands  of her disapprobation; a false step on the part of one of the aunts, for instance, could have reversed her attitude, and led her into a eulogy of black, into a martyred position whence the garments of all the others were an insult to her lone and exclusive widowhood, into a position where she alone had the right to flout the weight of tradition.
She was, as Clara had discovered at an early age, colossally inconsistent; and sometimes Clara thought that it might have been easier to live with a true religious fanatic, whose fads and fancies would be at least predictable and well-marshalled, with the backing of some kind of external authority, from which there could be some appeal.
As it was, it was impossible for even the most servile and well-meaning to avoid offence.
For what Mrs Maugham thought one week to be wholly disgraceful, she was praising the next, and with no apparent consciousness of discrepancy.
For instance, there was the question of the coffin.
Clara could not count the times she had heard her mother declare that when she died she would be dead, and she wouldn't care what happened to her body, and for all site cared they could put her out for the dustman to collect sentiments which from the first had filled Clara with a vague alarm and horror, for they were clearly reasonable enough in their own way.
And yet, when her husband died, the price and quality of the coffin became topics of obsessive interest, and the precise balance of economy and decency a subject for endless dissertation.
Clara heard again and again of Mrs Hewitt, who buried her husband in an economy coffin of some inappropriately cheap and porous wood, and claimed a rebate from the insurance, and of the equally wicked and abandoned Mrs Duffy, who had squandered a fortune on black crepe and gilt handles, through a sheer love of ostentation.
In the end, Clara, exasperated beyond endurance, brought up once more the possibility of cremation (not daring to mention, even in her own mind, which had not quite forsaken filial tenderness, the possibility of the once-praised dust cart) and Mrs Maugham, square, immutable, said quite astonishingly for her, and invoking sanctions she had been deriding for thirty years, that ashes must go to ashes and dust to dust.
Clara  forbore to point out that cremation did result, precisely, in ashes, because she took, expertly, her mother's meaning, which was that cremation was an unnatural practice and that bodies ought to rot quietly at their own leisure.
And moreover Clara had even seen in the phrase some dim, far-off flicker of comfort, because, harsh though it was, it was not without a consoling figurative literary beauty.
The world of the figurative was Clara's world of refuge.
The literal world which she inhabited was so plainly hostile that she seized with ardour upon any references to any other mode of being; she came across few direct ones, in that suburban and industrial spot, so she had to make do with the oblique.
Even a turn of phrase could affect her, however worn and faded in its application, and one of her mother's favourite sayings "What can't be cured must be endured," never failed to give her a certain thrill, partly because of the grim inevitability of the rhyme, and partly because it almost managed to lend a little spare dignity to her mother's stoic outlook.
Similarly, she would turn to the quotations from the Bible, which appeared on church notice boards, and on certain hoardings in the town centre, and which would declare.
 "I am the Way, the Truth and the Life" , or "Straight is the Gate and narrow is the way which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it" , or "Man shall not live by bread alone" .
These comforted her, not because she had any faith in their message, but because they were phrased with some beauty; they were made up of words that seemed to apply to some large and other world of other realities, and they bore witness, also, to the fact that somebody had thought it worth his while to put them up.
Just as some would pay for intelligence, so would others pay for the spirit.
Even if the messages were not true (and she had no hope that they might be true) at least somebody believed sufficiently in their truth to pay cash for them, to rent hoardings and to put up posters for them, and that in itself offered some kind of alternative: Christianity meant nothing to her, but she was glad that in despite of her mother's defection, it existed.
Of hymns, too, she made her own use.
She was not alone in this, for most of the girls at her school managed to infuse a certain erotic passion into their rendering of various appeals to the Creator, and there was one girl, who fancied herself in love  with a naval cadet, who could actually produce real tears during the singing of:
Eternal Father, strong to save
Whose arm doth bind the restless wave.
She was a truly wondrous sight: her prestige for this feat was enormous.
Clara never managed to do anything nearly as impressive, but nevertheless she had her own private favourites; she was not without a vulgar inclination towards:
Jesu, lover of my soul,
Let me to thy bosom fly
An inclination which she shared with every other girl in the school, but her own particular choice was a hymn by J. M. Neale, the first verse of which ran:
Jerusalem the Golden
With milk and honey blest
Beneath thy contemplation
Sink heart and voice oppressed
I know not, oh, I know not
What social joys are there
What radiancy of glory
What light beyond compare.
The combination of the words and the music of this hymn could unfailingly elevate her to a state of rapt and ferocious ambition and desire; she pictured, even at a most tender age, not the pearly gates and crystal walls and golden towers of some heavenly city, but some truly terrestrial paradise, where beautiful people in beautiful houses spoke of beautiful things.
It must have been the word "social" that created for her this image, a word judiciously expunged from later versions of the verse.
And it seemed to her that that broken line, I know not, oh, I know not", expressed a level of passion as high as any the English language could achieve; the interjection and the repetition and the archaic inversion were to her the exhaled breath of yearning.
She also sought, of course, the more usual and natural means of escape and fantasy, such as the watching of advertisements, the reading of fiction, and the spinning of self-indulgent romances, but her experience of life as a child was so narrow  that she had no way of telling the possible from the absurd.
And even as a child, she wanted things to be possible.
She read with avidity the endlessly cosy adventures of wealthy children on farms and in smugglers' caves and country houses, but she found built into them a warning against too much belief.
They did not sufficiently approach the reality that she knew, whereas the threat of the straightness of the gate seemed unfailingly significant.
Moreover, children's stories and advertisements never offered any true complication, and it was complication, in the absence of conviction, that she was seeking.
She did not believe that the wicked could be caught by ten-year-old children and returned to the police station in exchange for a pony, any more than she believed that constant hot water would make young mothers smile constantly with relief and proud love.
Her mother had constant hot water, and she did not smile.
She searched in vain in these golden childish worlds for the true brittle glitter of duplicity, for the warm shine of wider, more embracing landscapes; she looked for half-truth, for precious qualification, for choice, for possible rejections, and she could not find them.
The advertisement life was better than her own, but it was crude, amoral: it lacked both virtue and vice.
The books about children with ponies were books from the library.
The books which were in the house were of another kind and pursued a different and more old-fashioned simplification; some of them were indeed Victorian in fact as well as in tone, relics of her grandmother's childhood.
Nobody read them but Clara, and she read them only because she read everything.
They preached the lessons of moderation, cleanliness, simplicity, self-denial and humility with an admirable thoroughness, low-church to the core; not an angel or a lily disfigured their pages.
Their only appeal to Clara lay in their austerity, which sometimes reached a point where it bordered on the dangerously extreme; there was one sad tale, for instance, of a little girl who cared for her cruel stepmother with unfailing devotion, and who died of pneumonia after running out in her nightgown to look for her stepmother's cat.
But her favourite was a book called The Golden Windows, a Sunday School prize of her mother's.
This was a book of fables, most of them pointing in the inevitable direction; the title story told, with some charm, of  a little boy who saw from a hillside while out walking a house whose windows were all of gold.
He searched for this wonderful house, but could not find it, and was returning home disappointed when he realized that the house was his own house, and that the gold was merely the reflection of the sun.
The moral of this story, was, she assumed, that one must see the beauty in what one has, and not search for it elsewhere; but it carried with it, inseparably, the real sadness of the fading windows, and the fact that those within the house could never see them shine.
There was another story about a blind mother, whose son did not return after the battle; she wept when he did not return, and asked the survivors if they had seen a young and lovely boy lying slain, dressed in delicately embroidered garments of fine silk, and the survivors said No, they had seen no boy, but they had seen a great bearded man dead, and he had worn tied about his waist strange garments, torn and faded and old, which had once been embroidered with flowers.
Clara did not understand this story, but it seemed to her to tell of an emotion a size larger than pathos.
The most interesting story of all, however, was called The Two Weeds.
In this tale, two weeds grew on a river bank; one of them conserved its energy, and grew low and small and brown, with its sights set on a long life, while the other put forth all its strength into growing tall and into colouring itself a beautiful green.
During the summer, these two weeds reviled each other, as fabulous creatures will; the lowly weed accused its brother of grandiose, spendthrift ambitions, and the tall weed called the low weed mean and miserly.
At the end of the summer, a beautiful girl passed, and she saw the tall weed, and plucked it and put it in her dress, where it blushed a glorious red and died content; the weed on the bank saw it die, and laughed, and reflected that it would live till the next year.
And it did.
The curious feature of this tale was its moral ambivalence.
By every law of the genre, the death of the tall weed should have vindicated the life of the other, as the death of the grasshopper vindicates the ants, but the story somehow did not end that way.
Incredibly enough, it seemed to end with a choice.
It would hardly have been possible for it to support beauty and extravagance and pleasure at the expense of mere survival, but it did  at least hint that such a view could be held, and its mere admission of this possibility was to Clara profoundly satisfying.
Each time she read the story, she experienced a new shock; it was the shock of finding the new contained and expressed in the framework and the terms of the old.
In such context, between such gilt-lettered cloth-bound boards, the concession was nothing less than munificent.
When she was eleven, Clara, like her brother Alan before her, acquired a Grammar School place.
Her mother, although of the mentality that refuses such places because of the price of the uniform, was luckily not in a social or financial position where she could reasonably do so, and although she was often unreasonable enough, she did not like to appear to be so in the eyes of the whole neighbourhood, so she constrained her parsimony and her innate distrust in education into selecting the less distinguished of the schools available, on the grounds that the bus fare was cheaper.
It was a large, rather forbidding and gloomy building, called Battersby Grammar School, and it was on the fringe of that decayed, desolate, once-grand grey fringe that surrounds the centres of most cities; the houses in this area, large and terraced and of some dignity, had been long abandoned by the middle classes, and were now occupied by families who could not afford to live anywhere else.
An occasional member of the fugitive genteel stuck it grimly out until death; once Clara was accosted by an old lady, battered and ragged and bent, who said as she walked along, and in accents of refined madness, that once the people that lived there had held their heads up high.
Clara.
a poor audience with her twisted knee socks, did not know what she meant.
The shabbiness of the district and the dingy gloom of the school itself meant nothing to Clara.
To her, the building was endlessly exciting, and she liked it for all the reasons that most people would specify as particular causes for dislike.
She liked its huge, barn-like, inhuman bleakness, its corridors shoulder-high in dark green, shoulder-to-ceiling in pale peppermint, its vast lukewarm radiators, its muddy echoing boards, its tall, high, dirty windows.
She liked the cloakrooms and the lockers, the sense of institution, the rows and rows of washbowls and  lavatories, the accessibility of the drinking fountains.
She liked the way it stood, distinct and certain, rising out of the level muddy waste of grass and tarmac that generously surrounded it: a bomb had fallen during the war, on a neighbouring chapel, and the site had been levelled out and was now an unofficial part of the school's playgrounds The whole area was of a bleak airiness, and a cold wind seemed to blow incessantly upon it, turning the knees and knuckles of the girls pink and blue, and snatching away their obligatory berets the moment they emerged from the school porch.
Clara did not mind the cold, for she liked anything that was not small and cramped and heartlessly cosy; she liked the nameless multitudes that tramped mud on the cloakroom floors and left hairs in the cloakroom basins, and liked them because they were nameless, because they were not her mother and Alan and Arthur.
Domesticity appalled her, and she nourished in it, despite a yearning for the comfortlessly grand.
She liked, too, the work.
She found it easy: to begin with, she found everything easy, as her memory for facts was remarkable, and it was only as she grew older that she began to notice in herself slight doubts about her ability to pursue higher physics and mathematics.
The subject known, broadly, as Science, was at first her favourite, because she liked playing with Bunsen burners: at home she was not allowed even to switch on the gas fire.
She liked it also because of the power which she most rapidly acquired over Mrs Hill, her science teacher: the first power of her life.
Mrs Hill was a small, plump, middle-aged woman, with fine frizzy hair which she encased in a fine frizzy hair net; she always wore a purple and blue flowered pinny, a garment more in keeping with an aunt or a cleaner than with a lover of science.
She handled her apparatus with the efficient familiarity with which other women handle their baking boards and rolling pins; years of housework had left their mark on her.
She had no children, but unlike most of the staff, she had a husband, and the girls could detect in her manner a faint abstraction, a slight absence from the ingrown matters of school life.
She was set apart, by her overall and her laboratory and her marital status, which was lucky for her, as her position otherwise would have  been truly grim.
For she was one of those born failures as a disciplinarian, one of those teachers whose classes know they can do anything they want.
If she had been an ordinary teacher, trying to teach an ordinary sedentary subject like history or Latin, she would have been mercilessly flouted and mocked, but as it was she managed to get by.
For one thing, her subject was in itself appealing to most of the girls, or at least intermittently so; they enjoyed watching crystals grow, and weighing small things on small scales, and making little bits of sodium whizz round saucers of Water, so they quite voluntarily offered her their attention from time to time.
But her great quality was a capacity for being genuinely impervious to inattention.
She did not really care whether people listened or not; she was interested herself in what she was saying, and she was quite happy to potter about from bench to bench watching people writing their diaries when they should have been writing up their experiments.
Her blackboard technique was also extremely idiosyncratic; she would write up equations, get them wrong, mumble to herself, rub them out, look them up in a book, and all this without any suspicion that she might be forfeiting the confidence of her pupils.
The girls, although they did not know it, found her relaxing.
They affected to despise her, but they did not find their contempt a strain, whereas the other really bad disciplinarian in the school, a Geography mistress, one Miss Riley, inflicted on them an intolerable suffering, for they felt themselves compelled to torment her, and she would sit before them, thin and pretty and anguished, making vain attempts to restore order, miserably transparent in her misery, and unable to conceal the depths of her humiliation — depths which frightened them, but which they could not leave unplumbed.
Mrs Hill, on the other hand, with her vague indifference, did not rouse their cruelty, so their behaviour in her classes left them unashamed.
Their behaviour was at times appalling; when little they would spend long stretches of each class on the floor behind the benches, playing with bits of mercury, pricking it with needles and pen nibs, watching it slip into the coarse splintery cracks of the dusty floorboards, and forcing it out again, marvelling at the way it shrugged the dirt off its rounded shoulders.
When older, bored  with such simple pleasures, they sought new diversions, such as burning holes in the benches with the Bunsen burners.
On one occasion Clara's class purchased a pound of sausages, took them in with them, and roasted them on one of the burners, and ate them, in full scent and in fairly good view; Mrs Hill appeared not to notice, and talked quietly on of Boyle's law.
Clara did not enjoy her sausage, for it was burned black on the outside and raw in the middle, and her mother had told her that it was impossible not to get worms from raw sausage meat, but the taste of the damp mince with its bitter crust remained a strong reminder of illicit pleasure.
Mrs Hill took a fancy to Clara.
Clara, when she became aware of it, was not displeased, because although the other girls laughed, she knew enough of the world to know that no affection, however oddly won or placed, is laughable or negligible.
Other teachers and other girls were forever taking fancies to each other, but there was something strangely eccentric about Mrs Hill's fancy, just as her whole position in the school was eccentric.
It was in no way intense, and indeed coming from such a figure it could not help but appear a little maternal; Mrs Hill did not seem to discover anything odd in her own attitude, and would consult Clara's opinion without any attempts at subterfuge or bravado; she would defer to Clara's position in the class by outrageously open remarks such as "Now, Clara, you're the only girl likely to remember what I said last week" , or "Well, I suppose I'm wasting my breath on all but Clara Maugham." 
This frankness was so unprecedented that the girls could not resent it; they could not, in the context of school behaviour, take it seriously enough to resent it.
They giggled about it, and Clara giggled too, and that was that.
Clara even grew quite fond of Mrs Hill, and proud of herself for feeling fond of one so odd.
The case of Miss Haines was a different question altogether.
Miss Haines too favoured Clara, but being young and honourable she made every effort to conceal it.
French was her subject, and she was potentially the classiest teacher in the school.
She liked Clara because Clara was bright, and for no other reason: she had no need to like her for any other reason, as she was well equipped with a busy social life and a lover.
The girls  respected her because she had nerve and a good front of confidence, and because she possessed a very smart line in jerseys and fancy stockings, and wore shoes so fashionable that to the untrained eye they looked positively orthopaedic.
Clara was not fully aware of Miss Haines' interest, because it was hidden by a sharp and brisk demeanour, and by an almost excessive severity, so she worked all the harder in her efforts to impress.
It was not until she reached the age of specialization that she realized how well she had succeeded, although she had had her suspicions: but at the age of fifteen, at the moment of choice, the moment from which the Arts stretched away in one direction and the Sciences in another, never to meet again, she realized that Mrs Hill and Miss Haines had actually been fighting over her.
The knowledge gave her an inexplicably profound satisfaction.
She never for a moment thought of deserting French for Mrs Hill, having encountered amongst other things some nasty problems about the nature of electricity, but she did enjoy the sensation of flirtation: she spent a long time making her mind up, and finally was summoned by the headmistress, who told her she ought to stick to Sciences, because they offered better prospects.
Whereupon she came out into the open and said she would choose Arts.
On the way out of this interview, she came across Miss Haines, clad in a thin ribbed sweater in a very nice shade of mustard, with a very nice matching skirt.
And Miss Haines, as Clara suddenly realized, with a curious tremor of conviction, had actually been hanging around in the corridor waiting for her to emerge.
 "Hello, Clara," said Miss Haines.
 "Hello, Miss Haines," said Clara, giving nothing.
 "I hear that Miss Potts asked to see you about next year's work," said Miss Haines.
 "Yes, she did," said Clara.
There was a slight pause, while she relished to the full her own desirability as a pupil.
 "I hope you didn't change your mind about taking up languages," said Miss Haines, finally, and with a slight constraint.
 "Oh no, Miss Haines," said Clara, mercifully, smiling now.
"Oh no, of course not.
I told her I was frightfully keen to carry  on with French.
And she said I was to think it over, but I've thought it over already, really."
And Miss Haines, who had been smiling too, as she heard this, abruptly stopped smiling, and assumed once more her brisk air of challenge, and said, "Good, good," and stalked most coldly off.
But Clara was not perturbed by this change of manner: she knew now what it meant.
On the bus home that day, she wondered what her parents would have to say, if she were to ask them about it.
She wondered if there was the faintest chance of impressing them with the significance of her position.
It was a pleasant summer afternoon, and the rows and rows and rows of houses looked unusually bright and gay in the sun; the city, like Rome, was built on a series of hills, and there were several impressive long-distance views of hillsides covered with serried networks of roof tops and chimneys.
This helped to alleviate the dreadful nature of the houses, which looked shocking from nearby, but which looked oddly bright and distinct and well-intentioned when glorified by mass and distance.
Indeed, Clara knew from first hand experience the moral truth of the story told in The Golden Windows about the house with the golden windows, for she had once admired from a friend's house the whole dazzling, distant, smoky lay-out of her own hillside.
It was hard, travelling home in that bus, and surrounded by the immense, evident, and varied liberties of people and land, to believe in the small impossibilities of her own home, and she felt, as she so frequently felt, the will to believe it to be different: the truth was too grotesque and too unnatural, and her hopes were so strong that she carelessly let them wander a little, giving them a little leeway, letting them sniff and pry and explore.
When she got off the bus at her usual stop, even the moderate leafiness of the district contributed to her hopes, and she saw, fleetingly, the features that caused it to be described by others as a desirable residential area.
She walked down Chestnut Drive, and as she picked a leaf off a privet hedge here, and ran her hand along a row of railings there, she thought that it was not so bad after all, and that she would tell them about it: they always said, when accused of indifference, that they were interested, so she would jolly well try to make them show a bit of their interest.
Even the sight of their own front garden could not quite depress her.
It consisted of a small oblong patch of mown but weedy grass, in the centre of which stood a small green flowerless shrub with dirty leaves.
The path to the door, like the path of the other half of their semi-detached building, was made of crazy paving.
Mrs Maugham did not like crazy paving, because the stones worked loose, and she wanted it done in asphalt; Clara did not like crazy paving either, but felt obliged to defend it.
The front door was painted blue, and had a coloured glass panel, which Mrs Maugham did not like.
Over the porch was a wooden pointed hood with scalloped edges, to keep off the rain, presumably from the heads of visitors waiting for the door to be opened.
Mrs Maugham did not like this either, on the principle that it was neither use nor ornament.
Clara, naturally, did not approach the front door; she went in by the back, and into the kitchen.
Her mother was there, checking over a grocery order.
She did not look up as Clara entered the room, but said, "I put down large, and they go and send me outsize" .
She always accompanied her unpackings by such comments, always with the same indignant implication that the grocers did their best to defraud and anger her with every item.
Nevertheless, Clara could tell from her tone that she was pleased about something, and, as she took off her blazer and hung it in the cupboard, she waited to hear what it was.
Information, however, was not proffered at once; Clara was sent upstairs to change out of her uniform.
When she got down again her mother was setting the table for high tea; Clara, mutely.
began to help, thinking that she might either find some opportune moment for introducing her own problems, or that she might be treated with news of her mother's latest triumph.
Usually she tried to evade such duties, by hanging around in the bathroom or in her bedroom; she loathed the tedious, repetitive business of the house.
 "Mrs Hanney came in today," said Mrs Maugham, as she passed the tea cosy through the hatch to Clara.
 "Oh yes?" said Clara, in the grip of a horrible, bored fascination.
 "She wanted to use the telephone," said Mrs Maugham.
 "Yes," said Clara, beginning to understand the nature of her  mother's satisfaction; the lack of telephone of Mrs Hanney had been for some years a subject for discourse in a vein of amazed contempt.
 "Her television had gone wrong," continued Mrs Maugham.
 "She wanted to ring the service men." 
She paused, dramatically, allowing this statement to speak for itself, which it sufficiently did, for the fact that Mrs Hanney had a television and no telephone was the focal point of the Maugham household's scorn.
Such flouting of values, such wanton disregard for respectable priority, had often been remarked upon; Mrs Maugham was wont to enlarge upon the theme by describing situations in which a suddenly-paralysed Mrs Hanney, unable to reach a phone to ring for a doctor, would expire before the inane cacklings of her own television set.
It was true that Mrs Maugham's moral fervour had had slightly more edge in the days before she herself acquired a television set, but even now she managed to retain sufficient cause for indignation, and the quality of her feeling for Mrs Hanney had changed not at all, though her attacks had been somewhat restricted in scope.
Clara often thought that Mrs Maugham's attitudes towards the television typified her whole moral outlook; before acquiring it, she had considered it infinitely vulgar and debased; after acquiring it she considered all those without it as highbrows, intellectual snobs, or paupers, while still managing to retain her scorn for all those who had had it before the precisely tasteful, worthy and perceptive moment at which she had herself succumbed to its charms.
 "She wanted," continued Mrs Maugham inexorably, "to have it put right before that dreadful serial thing, whatever it's called, that thing about the family." 
And Clara saw that Mrs Hanney's ignominy was complete, for this programme, the name of which her mother so evidently did not forget, was considered by her mother to be the very lowest form of entertainment available, designed for the exceptionally stupid and depraved.
 "I told her," said Mrs Maugham, handing her daughter a plastic butter dish, "that I'd never seen it." 
And with that, her recital appeared to be ended.
 "Did the service men come?" asked Clara, feeling some word  required of her, and yet not daring to comment upon the story's true import.
"I wouldn't know.
I told her she should have it serviced more regularly.
She said they only got the men in when it went wrong.
This remark she delivered with the immense complacency of the wise virgin; Clara could not help but feel that having men in only when things went wrong was not as wildly eccentric as her mother supposed, but as she knew no other way, no other world, she could not be sure.
She was continually amazed and depressed by the way that the neighbourhood accepted and appeared to respect her mother's self-erected authority; none of them did as her mother did, and yet they all deferred to the solidity of her principles.
She had no friends, for she repelled intimacy as though it were an insult, but she had a position: her manner imposed itself relentlessly upon the indifferent and the unconcerned.
Clara could never understand why others did not repay her contempt with contempt — why, for instance, the church-goers and novel-readers and fillers in of football coupons and motorbike owners in the area did not possess the courage of their convictions and gang up on Mrs Maugham's massive disapprobation.
But they never did.
They appeared to apologize for their pitiable weaknesses, instead of forming themselves into a counter attack.
Clara had actually heard one constant church attender, caught out donating a small charitable sum to the Vicar, defend herself to Mrs Maugham by saying that she hadn't really meant to give it, and that she never would have given it if it hadn't been that her little boy had just given up Sunday school.
There was something in Mrs Maugham's solid air of conscious rectitude that threw a faint shadow of guilt over everyone who approached her, though as often as not people did not know why they were guilty: her disapprovals were so vast and public, her approvals so private and ill-chartered that all immediately cast themselves as goats in the discrimination of her gaze.
Occasionally a cheeky shop girl in town, caring nothing, and with nothing to lose, would face her out, but Clara on these occasions felt such anxiety and associated shame that she dared not rejoice.
The local shop girls never risked her wrath.
They were afraid of her.
And Clara too was afraid.
Although she fully intended to profit from the soothing exposure of Mrs Hanney by a judicious introduction of her own concerns, she found herself, when the moment came, quite unable to do so.
She stood staring at the yellow-flowered table cloth, as phrases formed and reformed inside her head, but she said nothing.
She did not know why she should feel such fear, because she felt for her mother not respect, but contempt: and why should she lack courage before someone whose attitudes were to her so transparently, pettily contemptible?
She loathed her mother's loathing of Mrs Hanney; it made her shiver with horror.
Even the sight of the table, laid there before her, filled her with disgust, for it bore witness to so many foibles, so many fixed and rigid rules.
There was not an object on that table that was without its history of contention; every implement lay there in the pride of hideous superiority.
And everything was ugly.
Clara could have forgiven the things their ugliness, if that very ugliness were not such a source of pride.
The cloth was linen, for Mrs Maugham held that plastic table cloths were the last resort of the working classes, and had said so often and at length; but it was adorned with place mats of plastic.
There was no need for place mats as the meal was to be cold, but place mats were invariably laid.
The rest of the objects were more in keeping with the plastic table mats than with the linen cloth, for Mrs Maugham was in practice a sworn friend to the synthetic; to her, utility was a prime virtue.
And yet her views of utility were far from strict.
The house was crowded with mock-useful objects, like pushbutton ashtrays (and in an un-visited house of non-smokers) and gadgets for watering plants and killing flies and dispelling odours and concealing rolls of lavatory paper and dicing potatoes and dispensing sugar.
Mrs Maugham was a great shopper in large department stores, and she could not resist their sillier notions; if anyone had accused her of extravagance, she would have roundly rebuffed the accusation as fantastic and perverse, and yet she must have spent many useless pounds in her pursuit of useful acquisitions Similarly, she always maintained that she hated clutter-clutter, implying, in her tone, the dense decorative drawing-room knick-knacks of Victorian England and yet clutter reigned in all her rooms.
But she could not see it as such  and indeed it could be said, on her behalf, that not a single object had been purchased or positioned for its decorative value.
Clara calculated that at least a third of the objects laid on the table, by regulation, were not used during the course of any single meal, and yet their function was certainly not one of gracious adornment.
There was a particular slop basin that Clara regarded with particular dislike.
It was decorated with purple tulips, and it was hardly ever used, for Mrs Maugham was not unaware that it was something of an anachronism.
And yet, every meal time, it stood there.
To Clara, it was always painfully conspicuous, an indictment of a way of life; she knew nothing of the history of slop basins, nor of the society that evolved them and their joyless name, but the sight of one affected her like some shameful family secret.
In no other household had she ever seen a slop basin, and she hated to see an eccentricity erected into a symbol of the traditionally correct.
As so often happened, she deliberated too long about the introduction of her own affairs, and when she finally found the courage to speak, she chose a bad moment.
She waited until tea time, and listened in silence while Mrs Maugham recounted her adventures with Mrs Hanney to the rest of the family: they were received in silence by Alan, Arthur and her father, who did not waste their speech.
Then Clara, into the lull that accompanied the pouring of tea, said sullenly:
"I saw the headmistress today.
About what to do next year.
I'm going to do French."
Her mother poured the last cup of tea, stirred it vigorously, picked up her slice of bread and butter, took a mouthful, chewed it, and then, "Suit yourself," she said.
Long before she left school, Clara discovered that whatever negligent indifference might greet her in the bosom of her family, she was capable of arousing strife in breasts other than those of Miss Haines and Mrs Hill.
The bosomy metaphor is appropriate, for Clara developed young, to the astonishment of her contemporaries, who had convinced themselves that sexual and intellectual precocity never coincided.
Clara regarded her own development with unreserved satisfaction, for she knew that it promised well.
By the time she was fifteen, her stock in the school rose enormously by virtue of the fact that she was a constant recipient of billet-doux from the boys of the neighbouring Grammar School.
The girls in her class, who had hitherto regarded her as relatively plain, and as a non-starter in the fashion stakes, with no notion of how to twist a school beret or hitch a school skirt, quickly reconsidered their assessment of her, and she found herself elected to an honorary membership of the fastest, smartest slickest coterie.
She was naturally gratified by this change of front, and drew the appropriate moral the possession of big breasts, like the possession of a tendency to acquire good examination results, implies power.
She never came to take her membership quite for granted: she had admired the in-people for too long ever to feel herself to be truly one of them.
Most of them had been in from the start, born survivors, born leaders: amongst these lucky few were numbered Rosie Lane, an athletic, pretty, small-faced girl whose father owned a large grocer's, and whose primal popularity h) d been cheaply purchased by the judicious distribution of dried apricots and jelly cubes, which the girls devoured whole.
Another was Susan Berkley, a bossy, self-willed creature, whose natural vigour went, as adolescence progressed, the natural way.
Then there were Heather and Katie, inseparable friends, who  bolstered each other by their mutual devotion; never had they known a Moment's shame of friendlessness, never had they had to look for a partner in dancing or in gym, never had they walked alone from classroom to classroom, and their confidence overflowed and imposed itself upon all beholders.
These four, in Clara's year, were the hard core of self-satisfied splendour, and to them others had been added.
Isabel Marshall had been added at the age of fourteen, when her gawky, bony clumsiness had suddenly transformed itself into dazzling beauty, and Clara, her especial friend, was added a year later when her breasts grew.
And then there was the odd case of Janice Young, who was, if anyone ever was, the doomed and unalterable scapegoat she was not pretty, she was not clever, she was not good at games, and yet, during her fifteenth year, she managed to make herself acceptable as one of the inner ring.
The inner ring itself could never quite understand her arrival there, and concluded finally that she made it through sheer cheek.
She was irrepressible, shameless, brazen; she ran after the boys, and the boys, to the amazement of the other girls, meekly succumbed, and took her out, and bought her presents.
She talked about her boyfriends in a tone of most frightful, spine-chilling, whimsy determination, and they took it.
She threatened them, she menaced them, and one day in this vein she would marry one of them.
She was not to be resisted.
And Rosie, Susan, Heather, Katie, Clara and Isabel could not resist her either; they let her join them, weakly, unable to refuse such primitive intention.
They showed, from time to time, a faint suspicious desire to force her to provide her non-existent credentials, but every time, just as their forces gathered for the attack, she would produce out of her hat some new and dazzling boyfriend, all ready to pay tribute to her elusive powers.
Clara felt herself to be extremely fortunate in her membership of this group, and the insecurity of Janice's position in it fortified her, for she knew herself to be more secure, less irritating, less tactless in every way than Janice.
So she was especially kind to Janice.
She was also rather surprised by the way in which she took her own newly-acquainted charms, for she was almost as determined as Janice to make the best of herself, and she had more to make the best of.
Some of the girls and even, oddly enough, the dashing, heavy-lipped, inviting Susan — were a little nervous about their developing selves, and a little alarmed by their own powers.
Clara, on the other hand, was not at all alarmed.
She did her best to stimulate a constant flow of love letters, and found the collecting of admirers a very satisfying pastime.
The chief scene for amorous exchange was the entrance to the boys' swimming baths, for the girls had no baths of their own, and were obliged to use those of their brother school for their weekly afternoon's lesson; here, on the steps, small red messenger boys would collect, proffering envelopes from their elders.
The girls enjoyed their swimming lessons, titillated by the well-known fact that some of the more daring boys used to watch them changing through an easily accessible sky light.
This well known fact was somehow never discussed in public by the girls, for public admission of it would have destroyed and inhibited its oddly private thrill, and would have shamed the vain ones into cowering in their cubicles, as the timid and modest already did.
As it was, such girls as fancied themselves would leave their cubicle doors open, in the hope that tantalizing glimpses of leg and breast and buttock might be seen through the high and smoky glass, and once Clara, taking advantage of the convention that they were unobserved, walked the whole length of the changing room draped only from the waist down by a small towel, on the pretext of borrowing a safety pin.
The other girls, knowing quite well that she had done it for the benefit of one Geoffrey A. Machin, were shocked and admiring, but the convention restrained them from expressing either shock or admiration.
On another famous occasion, Clara, stark naked, drying herself in her cubicle, caught sight of her own image in the wet tiled floor: "Good God," she cried out, "just look at me, how weird I look from underneath," and all the girls had cried out,"Ssh, ssh, Clara, somebody might be listening.
 "Whoever could be listening?" cried Clara loudly, knowing that Geoffrey A. Machin and Peter Hawtrey had cut Geography in order to do just that, and the other girls clucked and murmured and veiled themselves, thinking such deliberate flouting of the conspiracy of shame to be in doubtful taste.
But Clara had not cried out, originally, through vanity, nor for the benefit of her friends on the roof.
She had been truly moved by herself, by her own watery image, by her grotesquely elongated legs, her tapering waist, and above all by the undersides of her breasts, never before seen.
She stood there and stared at herself, seeing herself from that unexpected angle, as though she were another person, as though she were a dim white and blue statue on a tall pillar, a wet statue, a statue in water, a Venus rising from the sea, with veined white marble globes for breasts.
She had never expected to be beautiful, and she was startled to see how nearly she approached a kind of beauty.
She had never expected to be beautiful because nobody had ever suggested that she might be so.
Some mothers assume beauty in their daughters, and continue to believe it to be there, in defiance, often enough, of the facts, but Mrs Maugham was not one of these mothers.
She assumed plainness, and she found it.
She was so devoted to the principle that beauty is a frivolity and a sign of sin that she would have been ashamed to have it in the house.
Nevertheless, her conviction of its absence was not wholly generous, nor wholly without malice.
(On one occasion with magnificent inconsequence, she had remarked after staring at one of Clara's dazzling reports, "Well, handsome is as handsome does" ; this was the only occasion on which she had ever said anything complimentary about Clara's looks.)
Clara as a child had fully supported her mother's attitude, for she was in no way a pretty child; she was sullen, dirty, and her features were too big for her face.
As she grew older, however, her face grew as well as her hips and bosom, but her way of looking as though she were about to burst out of her clothes became an asset rather thin a disadvantage.
She had not expected to be such a kind of girl; she had watched this kind of girl for years (the lips discreetly reddened, the loud laughter on the school bus, the tossing of long hair beneath rakish berets, the swinging of hips, the whispering in the garden) but she had never expected to become one.
She had expected to be one of the others.
Although she was pleased with what she had become, and saw some future in it, there was one aspect of it that she did not like.
She did not, could not like the boys.
She persevered with them, in the hope that a taste for men, like a taste for the other  desirable sophistications of life such as alcohol and nicotine, could be acquired through hard work.
But it was hard work.
She often shrewdly suspected that they found it hard work too, and that for all their signatures of fondest love they did not really like her; they wanted her, they thought that she would do, but they did not really like her.
The difficulty was increased by the fact that she wanted good-looking boys only, and for some reason the really good looking boys were quite impossible to cope with.
For one thing, they could pick and choose, and they usually chose somebody else.
And when one of them did choose her, she found herself quite unable to talk to him at all.
There was one particularly disastrous episode with a boy of startling beauty; he was called Higginbotham, but even such a name could not dim his lustre nor silence his eclat.
This Higginbotham, the admired of all beholders, honoured Clara with a note one day, delivered at the door of the swimming bath by a small minion; it said:
Dear Miss Maugham,
I have observed you several times coming and going.
Perhaps you have observed me, I am often around, if you are not fixed up at the moment what about me waiting for you at the bus stop tonight?
I can go your way.
Yours faithfully,
J. R. Higginbotham
The receipt of this letter threw Clara into ecstasy, for she had indeed observed his comings and goings, and had been suitably taken by his solid, rocky, regular features and by the dashing abandon of his hair style.
She flashed the note around, proudly though covertly, and looked for him at the bus stop, but she could not look for him without some misgiving.
She hated to admit it to herself, but there was something in the style and appearance of his note that would not do.
The looseness of the syntax was a familiar symptom enough, but coupled with the handwriting it took on a more sinister light, for the writing was one of those faint, regular, carefully-looped hands which indicate an underlying antipathy to the written word.
She knew, from looking at it, that they would not get on.
But she passionately wanted to get on with him; she made every effort to  entertain and to captivate, for in proximity he was even more dazzling than from a distance.
Her excitement, as she sat next to him on the narrow dirty furry seat of the bus, was almost too much for her.
But it would not do.
He did not find her amusing, and she found him quite disastrously dull.
She could not have said that she found him dull, because she did not know it, and was conscious only of her own failure, and her misery at her own personal inadequacy quite drowned any sensation of boredom.
When he asked if he could see her again the next day, she would not have dreamed of declining; they saw each other for about a fortnight, and her enthusiasm for him increased with each meeting, though he said not a word of any interest in the whole two weeks.
They had no level of communication at all, and a bus ride with him was an ordeal rather than a pleasure, for she had to rack her brains to reply to his remarks about the weather, the town's football teams, the cinema, his headmaster, and so forth , but nevertheless when he wrote her a note saying:
Dear Clara,
I think it would be better if we stop seeing each other, I find I have a lot of work to do with my Alternative Maths,
Yours ever,
James
She burst into floods of horrible tears, and cried for a whole day.
It was on the rebound from Higginbotham that she took up with the first boy that she came near to liking.
He was not nearly as beautiful, but on the other hand his preliminary note promised other qualities.
It read:
Dear Miss Maugham,
I have had my eye on you for some time.
Now that Higginbotham has been given the brush off, may I venture to approach you?
I hope that you won't think I am rushing in, for I assure you that I am no fool, unlike certain other people.
Nor am I an angel, exactly, you will find that out for yourself, that is if you give me a chance.
There is a good film on at the Rex.
This is a hint.
I await your response.
Yours in hope,
Walter Ash  Clara knew quite well who Walter Ash was, and therefore did not flash this letter around the classroom, as she knew he was not a great prestige catch; on the contrary, he had a reputation for being rather a bore.
Nevertheless, she thought his note had possibility.
The syntax was not perfect, perhaps, but it was a great deal better than Higginbotham's, and the use of such lengthy phrases as "venture to approach" and "await your response" showed some acquaintance with the useful cliches of the language.
The handling of the "Fools rush in where angels fear to tread" theme, though not wholly elegant, showed ambition, and the assumption that Clara was responsible for the dismissal of Higginbotham showed courtesy, though she would have preferred his name to be left out of it altogether.
All in all, she thought she would give Walter Ash a try, despite the fact that people said he was very conceited, and despite his appearance, which was slightly against him, as far as his ears went.
Only slightly, however.
There were girls who were prepared to put up with fat.
far worse than Walter Ash's ears.
The evening at the cinema proved to be rather successful.
The film was a Western, and without guidance Clara would have dismissed it as a childish frivolity, a glorified version of The Lone Ranger.
However, Walter Ash said it was a classic, and talked knowledgeably about the genre, and so she permitted herself to enjoy it.
She had not even known that Westerns were a genre of their own; it was exciting news to her.
He talked, it was true, with a little too much self-confidence, and she could tell that his views were not entirely original, but she did not really care, because they were interesting, and it was something to be interested.
She was tremendously impressed by a casual comparison which he drew between the victorious hero of the film and Corneille's Le Cid, and all the more impressed because Le Cid was one of her set texts for A Level, whereas he was taking physics, chemistry and mathematics.
 "It's all a question of the difference between the epic and the tragic," he said, when she expressed a preference for heroes that die.
 "In this kind of film they're not supposed to die, they're supposed to win." 
His chief failing was a habit of cracking heavy pedantic jokes; he was unable to let a good idea drop, and remarked several times  during the course of the film that the heroine looked like she ought to be playing the horse.
The comment had some truth in it, in that the heroine did indeed have an equine cast of feature, but he made it too often, and with too little variation; however, she was willing to forgive him, in view of his evident tolerance of her own social errors, such as an inability to say whether or not she wanted an ice cream.
This outing was a prelude to many more.
She went out with him faithfully for several months, and as time went on she found that she liked him both less and more.
He annoyed her in many ways — mostly by his incurable facetiousness, which went down very badly with her girl friends, and by his desire to undress her at every possible opportunity.
Although only sixteen, she was not much shocked by his attempts, but she was alarmed by her own lack of response, for she did not fancy him nearly as much as she had fancied the infinitely tedious Higginbotham.
What she liked in him most was the sense which he gave of being connected to and aware of other worlds; he promised connexion.
He was aware of things which she had known only by hearsay to exist, and he possessed sophistications which were most unusual in one of his age.
For instance, he took her to a newly opened Greek restaurant, and introduced her to the delights of something called Baklava Syrien, which, having a sweet tooth, she very much enjoyed — although he managed simultaneously to annoy her by various highly irritating remarks about the way in which West Indians eat Kit-e-Kat, and by a joke about a man in a Chinese restaurant who found a finger in his Chinese soup.
His taste in films, plays, books and music was far more decided than her own, though she would not admit that it was superior: she thought that, given time, she could outdo him, but as he had a good start on her in time, she was glad to listen to him.
What impressed her most of all was his knowledge of the town itself, and of the way a town functions.
She had no knowledge of the town; her impressions were confined to the bus ride to and from school, and to various coffee bars and shops in the centre.
But Walter was well on the way to knowing his way around.
He knew which cinemas occasionally showed good films, and which cinemas never; he knew about a painter who had been born in Northam, and whose work could  be seen in a room at the Public Library.
He knew the name of the Mayor, and he knew why Battersby was not the be.at Grammar School.
He was sufficiently well-informed to be able to declare that it was a scandal that the town lacked any kind of orchestra, whereas Clara would have taken the lack of it as a simple act of God.
He even Venture, once, a remark on the architecture of the Town Hall, but he would not elaborate upon it.
(She found the remark, years later, in Betjeman.)
The other girls laughed at this erudition, but Clara did not laugh, for she could imagine a scheme of events in which such knowledge might be an asset.
One of the moments which remained most strongly in her memory took place in the town's most learned book shop, a charming building that dated, almost alone in the town, from a pre-industrial epoch; it was tall, and narrow, and its windows Were so small that it could display only ten books at a time, and those ten were changed but once a month.
Clara had visited this shop many times, and had stood for hours surreptitiously reading C. P. Snow, Tolkien, D. H. Lawrence and the poems of T. S. Eliot.
She regarded it as an unofficial library, as remote and as Municipal as the library itself And then, one Saturday morning, she went into it with Walter Ash, to look at (not to buy) the text of Anouilh's Ring Round the Moon, which was being currently performed at the local rep.
While they were there, an elderly man came down the stairs from the upper floor (with its second hand books and books of local interest), and started to wander around, absent-mindedly Clara could tell from a certain straining of attention on Walter's part that he was trying to catch the old man's eye, and eventually he succeeded in doing so; the old man nodded and smiled, with a bare "minimum of recognition, and Walter said" Good morning, Mr Warbley."
When the old man had wandered upstairs again, with a book under his arm, Clara whispered "Who Was that?" and even as she Whispered she realized that it could be no other than the book shops owner, and added hastily, "That must be A. I Warbley, I suppose?" 
 "No, it's his son," said Walter, shepherding her out into the street.
"The old man founded the book shop, and that was his son.
Don't you know about the Warbleys?"
 "Well, not much," said Clara, wisely unwilling to betray her total ignorance.
 "How do you know them?" 
 "I don't, really," said Walter.
"My parents know him, though.
He used to come round to the house, a few years ago, before he took up so much with the Labour Party."
And Clara, who could see no elegant way of enlarging this tantalizing scrap of information, had to make do with it — she dared not ask any further, for she knew nothing about the Labour Party, nor about the elder Ash's political views, nor about A. J. Warbley himself, beyond the fact that his name was written up in black Gothic letters over his son's shop door.
But the hints and intimations which it conveyed to her stretched far, far away, into the past and the future, and she had a sudden, piercing, painfully beautiful vision of a life where men with book shops called upon friends for the pleasure of society, and quarrelled with those friends upon topics as elevated, as unworldly and as magnificent as the Labour Party.
Her desire for such a life was so passionate, and her gratitude to Walter for this glimpse of it was so great that she could have kissed him in the street, and later that day she did in fact allow him to undo her brassiere strap without a word of protest.
For her parents had no friends.
Nobody ever visited their house except through obligations, and such family celebrations as still persisted had been transformed into grim duties.
Christmas came, and the family groaned, and dourly baked its cakes and handed round presents; birthdays came, and useful gifts were unfailingly proffered.
Nobody ever dropped in, and her parents never went out, save to large and joyless civil functions, or to the cinema.
Clara could feel her friendly spirit choking her at times; she had affection in her, and nowhere to spend it.
Sometimes she dared to wonder at the causes for this way of life, for she could see that it did not represent a normal attitude towards society, though it was so deeply bred in her that all aberrations from it were for the rest of her life to seem to her perverse: but when, occasionally, she glimpsed some faint light of causation, she recoiled from it and shut her eyes in horror, preferring the darkness to such bitter illumination.
Once her mother, talking of Christmas, had said that as a child she had herself received no presents, as it had never occurred to anyone  to buy such things — but that one year her elder brother, thinking to tease her, had hung at the end of her bed a stocking, and that when, excited, she had sprung to open it, she found it contained ashes from last night's grate.
This story was recounted as a warning to naughty children.
Clara, having heard it, lay in bed and trembled, too frightened to cry, and counted herself lucky for her share of lip service.
The worst moments of Clara's domestic life were not in fact those moments at which domestic indifference fronted her most blankly and sheerly, for they could be faced by an equally stony frontage — they were those which bore witness to hidden chinks and faults, deep within the structure.
One of the events which shook her most of all was the occasion upon which her mother gave her permission to go on the school trip to Paris.
This school trip was not an annual event, but a newly-organized affair, to which the school's attention had been drawn by the tireless Miss Haines; it was to take place in Clara's last year, when she was seventeen, a year after her father's death.
All those who were doing Advanced Level French were encouraged to go, and most of them were only too glad to do so, because the trip was both cheap and co-educational.
Clara, when the idea was broached, declared instantly that it was not worth her while to ask her mother's permission, whereupon the school embarrassingly said that if it were finance that were in question, then help might be forthcoming.
Clara could not explain to the school that it was not so much a question of finance, as of her mother's instinctive opposition to any pleasurable project — and anyone could see that a visit to Paris could not possibly fail to entail more pleasure than instruction.
Finance was not, in fact, particularly in question, as Mr Maugham had provided for his family with a thoroughness that bordered upon the reckless — in so far as a man may squander upon insurance, he had done so.
The school's offer of support put Clara in a difficult position, because she felt obliged to make the project known to her mother.
She did not feel she could turn down such charity without proof of the necessary conditions of rejection.
She had, at first, absolutely no hope of consent, and for a week or so she tossed in bed at night preparing to brace her spirit against the  inevitable refusal.
And then, under pressure from Walter Ash, she allowed to slip into her mind the faint, faint hope that by some quirk of reasoning her mother might be persuaded to agree.
Once she had admitted the hope, she was inundated by whole floods of desire; the project took life in her mind, the trees grew leaves, the cathedrals grew towers and arches, the river flowed beneath its bridges.
A whole week in Paris at Easter seemed to her something for which she would willingly have sold her soul.
She tried, bitterly, to resist this fatal colouring; she tried to reduce the trip to words upon a notice board; but the mind had gone its own way, and she could not force it back into its grey and natal landscape.
She turned on Walter Ash and reviled him for allowing her to hope, and indeed, despite the final outcome, it was his dangerous encouragement of this scheme that prefaced her final disillusion with him.
She could not bear the sensations of loss with which she knew that she would be obliged to sit down and confront her mother.
She hated the school for forcing her through the mockery of inquiry.
She wished that the whole thing had never been.
And yet, when she finally, despairingly, screwed herself up and loosed the small words into the drawing room air, her mother said yes.
Sitting there, knitting, watching the television, knitting, her lips pursed over some unimaginable grievance, she listened, and nodded, and thought, and said yes.
Clara, who had phrased the question so deviously, flinching in preparation from a brutal negative, thought that she must have misunderstood, and repeated the whole rigmarole, and her mother once more nodded her head and said yes.
Or rather, she did not say "Yes" — she said "We'll have to see," but in her terminology this counted as a positive affirmative.
Clara, perched nervously on the edge of her easy chair, was almost too overwrought to continue the conversation, but she managed to say, "You mean you really think I might be able to go?" 
 "I don't see why not," said Mrs Maugham, with a tight smile which seemed to indicate pleasure in her daughter's confusion.
"I can't say that I see why not.
You say all the other girls are going, and if it's such a bargain as you say, then I don't see why not.
Do you?"
Clara could hardly shriek at her, you know bloody well why  not, you know bloody well why I can't go, it's because you're such a bloody-minded sadistic old hypocrite, it's because you think Paris is vice itself, and so do I, and so do I, and that's why I want to go.
and that's why you won't bloody well let me.
She could say nothing.
So she said nothing.
But she was almost choking with emotion.
And not with joy, either.
 "I don't see," continued Mrs Maugham,"why you shouldn't have a bit of fun too.
And if you say it'll be such a help to you, with your examinations, I don't see why you shouldn't go."
Clara did not know where to look.
 "Thank you," she said, and then, with a fine instinct for disaster, she tried to think of something to say to avert her mother's next words, she tried to speak, but she could think of nothing, and her mother, shifting in her seat, said,
"After all, Clara, you've had a hard year.
With your father.
You deserve a change."
And Clara sat there and endured it.
Because the truth was that this evidence of care and tenderness was harder to bear than any neglect, for it threw into question the whole basis of their lives together.
Perhaps there was hope, perhaps all was not harsh antipathy, perhaps a better daughter might have found a way to soften such a mother.
And if all were not lost, what effort, what strain, what retraced miles, what recriminations, what intolerable forgivenesses were not to be undergone?
And who, having heard impartially this interchange, would have believed in Clara's cause?
Clara's one solace had been the cold, tight dignity of her case, and this had been stolen from her, robbed from her by an elderly woman's few words of casual humanity.
She had learned a fine way of sustaining the role of deprivation, but gratitude was an emotion beyond her range.
She did not even thank her mother.
She sat there in silence, and resentment made her cheeks hot: she resented the wasted hours of battle with her own desires, she resented her failed and needless attempts at empire, she was filled with hatred at the thought of lost anticipations.
Now that she was to go, she knew that she might have had the pleasure of looking forward to going, instead of such long and cheerless debates and equivocations.
Bitterly she thought, it is all spoiled, spoiled by  consent, spoiled by refusal, it does not matter if I go or stay.
By letting me go, she is merely increasing her power, for she is outmartyring my martyrdom.
I die from loss, or I die from guilt, and either way I die.
It came to her later, as she started to do her homework, that Racine and Corneille appealed to her so strongly because their ways were hers.
For one event, five acts of deliberation.
But she played alone, because the other people would not play.
And she thought, as she sat there translating a piece of Polyeucte, that if ever she could find the personages for the rest of her tragedy, then her happiness would be complete.
That would be what she would want from life; she would want no more than that.
Before the departure for Paris, Mrs Maugham fortunately forfeited her position by various gratuitous and irrelevant remarks about the expense.
Clara, grown careless and ruthless now that the struggle was over, did not fail to point out that the school would have helped upon request.
Mrs Maugham countered this with contemptuous remarks about charity, and about the dignity of the family, and the lack of dignity of various families in the neighbourhood.
Clara swore that she would pay for herself out of her Post Office Savings: her mother said that her dead father hadn't put that money away for her to squander on trips abroad.
Clara pointed out that it hadn't been donated by her father in the first place, but by Aunt Doris, as birthday presents, over the past seventeen years.
 "Well then, your Aunt Doris didn't give it to you to squander on trips abroad," said Mrs Maugham.
And she was right there, too, but Clara was beyond the rights and wrongs of the case, blissfully carried away into the angry, amoral world of combat, wonderfully disconnected from truth and falsehood, freed from gratitude by meanness, released from effort by knowledge of fruitless impossibility.
And after no matter what contortions, it was upon Northam Station that she found herself, and with a ticket for Paris in her purse.
And she thought, as she stood there with Rosie, Susie, Katie, Isabel, Janice and Heather, that none of it mattered, none of it had any importance, in view of the fact that she was going.
What could those apprehensions signify, in the light of departure?
What could the nearness of victory mean to Berenice, after five acts, and at the moment of parting?
Or the possible loss of Chimene?
Excitement had for days so filled her that she could not sleep, and now at last she had embarked upon it; thoughts of loss and martyrdom paled before the facts.
What she had wanted, she was to have.
And she thought, guiltily, I do not even feel guilty.
Northam Station seemed to her a peculiarly lovely spot for such an embarkation.
It was vaulted and filthy, black with the grime of decades, and its sooty defaced posters spoke to her of the petty romances of others, of Ramsgate and Margate, and she was going to Paris, albeit in a school raincoat, and with a beret on her head.
The station had always been for her a place instinct with glory; its function beautified it immeasurably in her eyes.
She felt herself to be of right there, to have a place upon its departure platforms, and the London train drew in for her with a particular significance.
She had been to London once before only, and now she was going to Paris.
As the train pulled out of the station, she watched the black and ridged and hard receding buttressed walls, travelling through their narrow channel into some brighter birth, and into some less obstinately alien world.
And as they passed the rows upon rows of back yards, the grey washing on curious pulleys, the backs of hardboard dressing tables, the dust-bins and the coal sheds, it occurred to her to wonder why she should so suddenly feel herself to be peculiarly blessed, and a dreadful grief for all those without blessings took hold of her, and a terror at the singular nature of her escape.
Out of so many thousands, one.
Narrow was the gate and the hillsides were crowded with the serried dwellings of the cramped and groaning multitudes, the ranks of the Unelect, and she the one white soul flew dangerously forth into some glorious and exclusive shining heaven.
Victoria Station, when they arrived upon it, did not present a particularly exclusive aspect.
It was crowded and swarming with school parties, hundreds of schools all gathered together, some in uniform, some not in uniform, some accompanied, some unaccompanied.
Clara stared at them all hungrily, at the meek and the marshalled, at the loudly swearing, at the sophisticates, at the nervous and the panic-stricken ticket-mislayers.
And she stared too at her own friends, who appeared to her suddenly in a new light, laughing and fiddling with their luggage labels, and casting their eyes around them as though unbalanced by the sudden variety of choice.
The whole station was like some vast and awkward school dance, where need and constraint mingle in a heady, violent ferment of suppression.
And Clara was glad that she was not accompanied by Walter Ash.
She stood a better chance, she thought, upon her own: though a chance of what she would not have liked to have said.
The journey set in her a taste for such journeys that she was never to lose.
The very sight of the sign at the head of the platform, shabby and tourist and third class though it was compared with that of the Golden Arrow at the other end of the station, was enough to raise her to a state she had never reached before, and as the train moved south, she sat in her seat and stared out of the window as though in a trance.
The other girls in the compartment spent their time comparing their passport photographs, and commenting upon the rowdiness of some boys in the corridor, who seemed, to their disbelieving, priggish admiring indignation, to be drinking beer out of cans, but Clara, though she saw, was too rapt to speak.
The boat too affected her profoundly; she had never been on a boat before, except for a rowing boat in the park, and she stood up on the top deck in the bitter grey April wind, and watched the foam  and the emptiness and the receding bar of Folkestone, and she thought that she had never seen anything so wonderful in her life.
Later she explored, and the boat's possibilities seemed limitless; she did not think that she could ever tire of it.
It was a rough crossing, and most people were rather quiet, and a few were vomiting over the railings and indeed all over the upper-deck, but Clara had never felt better, and the rough lurching seemed to her an added attraction.
She noticed that several of the school parties were starting, tentatively to join up; those of her own friends who were not suffering in the Ladies' saloon were talking, intermittently, to a group of boys from a school in Birmingham.
But Clara did not join them: she kept herself to herself.
The only person that she spoke to on the whole crossing was a young man who fell on top of her as she and he were going down the stairs: he was following her, two steps behind, when the boat gave a violent lurch and he missed his footing and crashed into her, and she too missed her footing, and they both sat down together upon the stairs.
He helped her to her feet, anxiously dusting her coat, apologizing, undistressed, so courteous and unconfused that she felt that he had conferred upon her a favour, and to her amazement she heard her own voice answering, with equal, answering ease, assuring him that no, she was not hurt, no, of course it was not his fault, yes, it certainly was the roughest she had ever known it.
Then he left her, and she watched him go: he had yellow hair, unmistakable yellow hair, and she said to herself, there goes a public school boy.
She was not familiar with the type, but she recognized it when she saw it as she would have recognized the Eiffel Tower.
Later, five minutes outside Calais, she saw him drinking brandy in the bar, and he smiled at her, and said, "Why don't you have a drink?" but she smiled back, and shook her head, and walked on.
Paris, unlike the journey, had its disappointments, though she realized that what she principally disliked was the position from which she was viewing it.
The school trip was an example of massive disorganized organization: every minute of every day was officially occupied, and Clara wasted some time before she realized that nobody in the whole world would care or even notice whether she attended each event or not.
She was not  used to laws so easily broken, authority so easily evaded.
On the first morning, after a night in a Lycée bed, they all went to a preliminary reception at the Hôtel de Ville: Clara went, politely willing, but when she got there she found that it was a gigantic, milling, stifling insult.
Thousands of school children, all of them well over sixteen, were crammed there into a large tall gilt room, and told not to insult the French, not to talk to Arabs, and not to go to Montmartre: then an English lady stood up and said that Paris had always been for her a source inépuisable de something, and everyone clapped, and then they were all turned out again, rather quickly, for the room was clearly needed for something else.
Clara was not impressed, and amazed that she had the sense not to be impressed.
But she still did not realize how unnecessary it was to attend such events, and she continued to go to all the scheduled treats.
The Comédie Française did not impress her either, for it seemed to her a collection of posturing gabbling shadows, mocking at plays that she had studied in tranquillity and silence: the celebrated mirrors of Versailles were all spotty, Notre-Dame looked  at her as though it had two spires missing from on top, and the famous intellectual cafés were full of old men and tourists.
The lectures laid on at the Sorbonne were of an abysmal simplicity, and given by lecturers who grossly though understandably underestimated their audience: they bored her as she had not been bored by work for years.
In the end she decided that she did not like being a sightseer: the role filled her with an obscure rage.
She could not recognize, did not dare to recognize the grandiose ambitions whence her rage sprang; it did not amuse her to sit in the Deux Magots, remembering that Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir had once sat there, nor did she wish to glimpse the exteriors of the houses of the famous dead.
She wanted interiors.
She could not admit this, not even to herself, for such an admission would have pronounced her mad, but it lay there, subtly underlining her enjoyment.
She was not content to be insulted in cafés by waiters more rude than any to be found in Northam; she could not accept the lowliness of her status, for it seemed to pain her more abroad than it had done at home, and she felt that she should somehow have escaped it, that she should have  been changed, somehow, into something new.
Once she saw, sitting on the pavement before a café, drinking pale green drinks, and embracing, leaning over from their plastic chairs towards each other and embracing, the most beautiful couple; the man with a face angular and ravaged and tragic, the girl dark and thin, with pale lips in a dark tan face: and she was so moved that she said, aloud to Rosie who was walking with her, "Look, Oh God, look at those lovely people" : and Rosie looked and stared and laughed and said, "Good Lord, what odd ideas you have, I wouldn't look like that if you gave me a hundred pounds." 
They ate, three times a day, in the Lycée where they were staying, and the food was the subject of much exclamation.
Clara was glad that Walter Ash with his quips was not there to add to it.
Drinking coffee from bowls was universally thought to be charming, but other eccentricities did not go down so well.
Garlic was much disliked; the amount of oil was heavily frowned upon, and Clara was enraptured by the spectacle of the profound and shocked indignation which greeted a certain sausage that appeared for lunch one day.
The sausage was extremely coarse and highly seasoned, full of solid lumps of fat and gristle, infinitely far removed from the smooth uniform bread-crumb paste of sausages in England, and it was received with a horror too deep for words.
Silently, the rows of sixth-formers tasted, and chewed, and rejected; silently they pushed the food to the side of their plates.
Clara, like the others, found that the sausage inspired her with a sense of violent disgust, but she ate it just the same.
She chopped it up, and chewed it, and ate it.
Her friends turned to her and said, "You don't like it, do you?" and she turned to them with a smile of triumph, swallowing hard, and said, "Oh, it's all right, really." 
It was not until the next to last day of the visit that she finally formulated to herself her secret desire, which was to see Montmartre at night.
The fact that they had been warned off but made it the more attractive.
She was not sure what it was, or what to expect should she go there, but she wanted to see it"because it had been forbidden.
And on the penultimate day, emboldened by previous truancies, forays and excursions, she tried to persuade one of her friends to take the evening off from  Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme, and accompany her.
But to her surprise, nobody would go.
She had hoped that Rosie Lane at least, who was usually willing to try anything once, would have accepted the challenge, but she demurred, pleading a headache, and Janice told her, in mysterious tones, as though provided with obscene, private information, that she would be mad to go to such a place, that it was rough there, and wicked beyond all Clara's pitiful conceptions of wickedness, and that if she went there anything might happen to her.
 "What?" said Clara.
 "What might happen to me?" 
 "Ah, anything," said Janice, shaking her head darkly, as though she could have told, but would not.
So in the evening, after supper, Clara walked off by herself and caught the Métro and got off it at the Place Pigalle, for that was the only name on the Métro map that she recognized.
When she emerged, into the soft and dark and shining night, she caught her breath sharply, and tightened her grip upon her plastic shoulder bag.
For here, in a sense, was what she had come to see.
Here huge and naked cardboard women sprawled across the skyline, and red and green and yellow lights lit the blue air.
The streets were full of people talking, walking and standing and talking, and the doors of the bars were open, and the pavements were like shops and the shops like pavements.
The faint gay menace of music, issuing from juke boxes and radios, surrounded her, and it seemed that there was nobody, out of all those hundreds before her gaze, who was not there in the search of amusement — an amusement shallow, elusive, shapeless, all-embracing.
She stood there, staring, immobile at first, before the riot of flesh and lights and people and advertisements, and she wondered what it was that she was supposed to fear, because she could not truly fear anything, in such well-lit company: and she wondered why she was not afraid, when they had all told her, all of them, the Party Organizer and Janice and her upbringing, that she ought to fear.
She could see that nothing could harm her, that there was no danger, that danger in so far as it might exist was desirable, and she started to walk, slowly, up the street, looking at those who looked at her, exchanging glance for glance, shivering in the warm April air from a tremulous, hopeful, artificial  apprehension.
She shivered, and she walked as though she were naked.
She walked for ten minutes, and then she sat down, in front of one of the less dicey looking cafés, and ordered herself a Coca Cola.
She wanted to order herself a drink, but she did not dare.
Her courage had its limits.
She watched the other people, and wondered how many years of observation it would take her to learn to distinguish the tarts from the students, for there were clearly some of each within her range.
She opened her copy of Baudelaire, which she had brought with her, and started to look at it, and shortly she heard a voice say, "Mademoiselle, je peux?" and saw a man looking at her.
She nodded, because for shame she could do nothing but nod, and he sat down at her table.
He smiled at her, and she smiled back.
He was young, and not at all bad-looking; she thought that it could well have happened in a much worse way.
He asked her, in French, if she were German; she said no, she was English.
 "Ah, ah, Anglaise," he said, nodding his head knowledgeably, as though the word conveyed a wealth of information.
She could tell, instantly, that he was stupid.
He had to think for several seconds before he came out with, "Moi, je suis Italien." 
 "Ah, oui," she said, politely, giving him time, "Italien." 
He thought hard, and then said, "Vous êtes étudiante?" 
 "Oui," she replied indulgently.
 "Vous venez de Londres?" he then asked, anxiously, solicitously.
 "Non, non, du Nord de l'Angleterre," she replied.
The sense of effort in his conversation staggered her, and she watched him with pity, for he laboured as though he were to try to write a sonnet, and all the while the conversation was predestined, unnecessary, a mere coin of payment.
 "C'est très grand, Londres," he continued, unable to adapt to her last remark.
 "Oui, très grand," she agreed, and then asked him, politely, "Et vous, d'où venez-vous?" 
 "Da Milano," he said, and added helpfully,"Milan, c'est au nord de l'Italie.
C'est amusant, moi je  viens du nord de l'Italie, et vous venez du nord de l'Angleterre.
C'est amusant."
 "Oui," said Clara, and smiled benignly, while he laughed.
 "Le nord de l'Angleterre, c'est L'Ecosse," said the man, flashing his even teeth at her, showing them as though to compensate for the  deficiencies of his wit.
 "Oui," said Clara, thinking it not worth her while to draw the distinction.
 "Une écossaise, alors," he said, grinning.
She did not correct him.
 "Et vous, vous n'êtes pas étudiant," she said, thinking that she might learn the difference between tarts and students sooner than she had imagined.
 "Non, non, je travaille ici," he said.
She did not like to ask him the nature of his work, thinking that if he were something incommunicable, the effort of inventing a lie might crack him up completely.
He did not look resourceful.
On the other hand, she did not know what else to say, so she said nothing.
He too had come to the end of his small talk.
He sat there for quite a while, grinning at her, then looking away, then looking back and grinning at her again.
Such behaviour, which always unnerved her when displayed by such as Higginbotham, did not unnerve her at all.
The isolation of the moment, and its total disconnexion from all other moments, gave her a sensation of quite unfamiliar ease.
Her hands, clasped on the iron table, grew limp.
After a while he offered her a cigarette.
She took it, and he lit it for her.
Her smoking experiences, hitherto, had been confined to a few borrowed puffs from Walter Ash's cigarettes, and some experimental moments, at the age of twelve, in the school bicycle shed.
This cigarette tasted different; it was a Gauloise, and it tasted of France, as pungent, as unacceptably alien as that knotty sausage.
She smoked it with delight.
 "Comment  t'appelles ?" he asked, after a few minutes.
 "Je m'appelle Isabel," said Clara.
"Isabel.
C'est jolie,"he said.
 "Tu trouves?" she said.
She did not ask him his name, for she did not wish to know it.
 "Qu'est-ce que tu fais ce soir?" he said eventually.
 "Rien, rien du tout," said Clara.
 "Tu veux m'accompagner au cinema?" he said.
And Clara, overcome by the wonderful, felicitous acceptability of his offer, an offer so familiar to her, so marvellously manageable, trembled only most slightly as she said, staring down at the limp arrangements of her hands, "Oui, surement." 
She had been afraid that his suggestion, when it came, would have been too fraught with the unknown his room, perhaps, or else, God knows, a naked nightclub but as for the cinema, she could cope with that.
And so they went to the cinema.
He took her arm, and held it firmly by its crooked elbow, propelling her so that she did not collide with the crowds of people, and she liked to have it held.
They went to the nearest cinema: it was an American film, dubbed, from one of Hemingway's short stories.
It was half way through, and she could not understand a word of the dialogue and was surprised and rather indignant that she could not understand, for she had genuinely looked forward, with half of herself, to seeing a picture: as it was, she found herself obliged to concentrate on the other aspects of the affair.
It was clear that he understood less of the film than she did, and cared less.
She was glad that it was connected, however dimly, with Hemingway, for she knew about Hemingway, and she liked shockingly the sense of an operating corner in her inviolable mind.
After ten minutes, he took her hand.
She allowed it to be taken, and it grew warm in his grasp.
Their two hands lay warmly together upon her lap.
Then he released it, and took a hold of her knee.
She was used to this, and did not flinch.
Her eyes firmly glued to the screen, she sat, and she endured and enjoyed.
After a while, he withdrew his hand, put his arm round her shoulders, and pulled her towards him, and kissed her.
She did not much like his way of kissing, for it was hot and suffocating, and she was glad when he stopped, and released her, and reverted to his grip upon her knee.
He was more interested in her knees, and so was she.
As the film progressed, he gradually began to hitch her skirt up, so that his hand was resting not upon skirt but upon stocking, and then his hand began to creep up the stocking.
She had never had this happen to her before, and she was not expert, in this area, in the art of procrastination, and in no time at all he had managed to  slip his hand inside the stocking top of her offside leg.
He was breathing heavily, and she was not herself unmoved.
And she had to admit to herself that she was also faintly, dimly, desirably worried, for she could not tell when or if he would stop.
She glanced, covertly, at her watch, and saw to her relief that the feature film had only ten minutes to run; she thought she could last ten minutes.
And she just about managed it.
As his hand started once more to ascend the bare slope of her thigh, she tightened, immeasurably, her knees, and his hand halted.
The film was nearing its climax: despite herself, and despite her incomprehension, her attention had been caught, and she was at last following it.
Two assassins were cornered in a shabby hotel bedroom, awaiting inevitable retribution.
And then, suddenly, one of them spoke a sentence which she understood.
One of them said, grimly, sparingly, desperate, to the other;
 "Il n'y a plus rien à faire," and Clara, in the exquisite delight of understanding, relaxed the grip of her knees, and his hand, obedient, stirred itself once more.
The assassins were shot, and Clara wrenched herself away, and the man murmured to her desperately, " Laschemi fare, laschemi fare," and Clara equally stricken, could not let him, and the credits came up, and the lights came up, and he let her go, and she straightened her coat and pulled her skirt tightly down over her knees, and that was that.
They walked out together, and stood there in the street, and Clara looked once more at her watch.
 "I have to go," she said, in English.
 "Il faut que je m'en aille." 
 "Oh, non non non," he said anxiously.
"Viens.
Viens boire quelqu'chose, viens avec moi.
J'ai une chambre tout près, une chambre à moi…"
 "Non, je ne peux pas," said Clara, realizing miserably that he did not believe that she would not go.
She liked him, for all his heavy breathing; she did not like misunderstanding.
And she had somehow thought that he would have known that she could not go.
 "Tu  peux , tu  peux ," he repeated.
"Mais non, je ne peux pas, je dois partir.
Tout de suite.
Le Lycée se ferme à onze  heures ."
He had taken it, now, that she was not going; she expected to see resentment blossom, but he did not resent it.
Hopeful, he said:
 "Demain, alors?" 
And she said no, she could not make tomorrow, she was going back to England tomorrow, which was not true, but true enough.
It was a pity, she said.
And he agreed that it was a pity.
 "Je dois aller," said Clara, losing grammar in urgency, beginning to be afraid that she might be late.
 "Merci beaucoup pour le cinéma." 
 "C'est moi qui te remercie," he said simply.
And then he shook her hand, and turned and walked away.
Clara, as she ran for the Métro, was full of the greatest joy of her life, for she felt herself to be, at last, living; the thick complexity of what had happened satisfied something in her that had never before had satisfaction.
She had dared, and she had not been struck dead for it; she had exposed herself, and she had not been raped, assaulted, or even insulted.
Such contact had for her possessed beauty, and he had shaken hands with her upon it; he had not yelled at her for what she had not given.
He had smiled at her, and shaken her hand.
The bizarre absurdity of his action filled her with amazement and wonder, for it seemed to disprove so many meannesses and preconceptions.
She would not have minded if he had yelled at her, for he would have had the right to.
But she too had the right to leave.
She got back to the Lycée at five past eleven; the doors were not yet shut, and she crept in safely, under the protection of a large party returned from the Opera.
She went up to the dormitory, where she found her school friends, anxious and exulting over her delay, grieved and relieved that her sortie had escaped detection; they gathered round her, perched on the bed, drawing cosily round themselves the striped dusty coarse hooped curtains on their brass poles, and they listened to her story.
Some of it they did not believe; some of it she did not report.
But they were impressed, and she too was impressed by her own adventure.
They whispered, and talked, and compared notes, and then Rosie, sitting cross-legged on the hard sausage of a pillow, said:
"Why didn't you go with him, when he asked you, why didn't  you go to his room?
You should have gone to see what it was like."
 "I would have done," said Clara, "but they shut the doors at eleven." 
And they said no more, because Rose had been teasing, merely; it had not crossed her head that Clara might truly have stayed out.
But later that night, lying awake in bed, Clara found herself trembling, partly from fright, and partly from the knowledge that perhaps she ought to have gone.
For there was no divine or moral key which turned the lock of the Lycée at eleven 0 clock.
She might have stayed out, and nobody would have known.
And if they had known, what could they have done?
They could not have raped her, or murdered her, or beaten her.
They could not even have made her fail her examinations.
And they would not have expelled her; they wanted her, and they could not afford to expel her.
She might have stayed, and the truth was that the possibility of staying had not occurred to her.
She sat for the evening with a strange man's hand inside her stocking, and yet it had not occurred to her that the laws of a disorganized school trip were not the laws of nature or of justice.
She was ashamed of herself.
She lay there, and her knees were trembling, but whether it was from running from the Métro, from past terror, or from shame, she could not tell.
On the last night of the trip there was a dance.
Some of the girls had been looking forward to this as to the highlight of the trip, but Clara had been dreading it, and for a classic reason, which was that she had nothing nice to wear.
Since her social life in Northam did not exist outside school, she had no evening clothes, and had had nothing resembling a party dress since the age of six, when she had possessed a fetching little garment of pink satin.
All the other girls had at least a best dress, and some of them were burningly anxious to display clothes bought by extravagant parents especially for the occasion.
Clara had had the sense not to try to ask her mother about a possible purchase, as she could only too clearly imagine the responses to which such a request would expose her, and the abuse which would be cast upon those girls fortunate enough to have a use for party dresses.
Her mother tended to see all expenses as a sign of innate vulgarity, and had tried to instil  into her children the view that the truly refined can manage without toys, clothes and entertainments.
Nevertheless, Clara had been obliged to raise the subject of a best dress, because the brochure about the school trip had clearly stated that it would be expected.
Her mother had reacted to the subject in a predictable way, and had expatiated at some length about the absurdity of taking a dress all the way to Paris and back for the sake of one evening's amusement, but in the end she had consented to do something about it.
What she did was to go through her cupboards, where she discovered a dress which had once belonged to Clara's cousin, and which had been enclosed years before in a charitable parcel of hands-on.
She came downstairs with this garment, triumphant, not unwilling to please with pleasure so cheaply bought.
And at the sight of it, Clara's spirits faintly rose, because the colour a blue-green was one which, at that age, she rather fancied.
But once she had tried it on, her spirits sank once more to unprecedented depths.
For the dress was quite impossible.
Or worse not quite impossible, but just about, just gently verging upon the impossible.
It was not so ridiculously bizarre that it was unwearable but it was bad enough.
For one thing, the material was patterned, and Clara was going through a stage at which the uncertainty of her taste made her prefer the strictly plain to the figured.
And the shape was all wrong.
It fitted her in as much as it had ever fitted anyone, but the bodice hung droopily over her breasts, and the neckline gaped softly round her throat, and the hem dipped at the back, with a scarcely perceptible, ineradicable dip.
And the material was shiny.
Clara had a horror of the shiny.
In vain did her mother insist that the material was expensive, and that anyone, looking at it, would know that it was expensive, for Clara knew in her heart of hearts that it looked cheap.
As it happened, Clara was wrong, but she was not to know she was wrong, and she suffered as much as though she had been right.
She stood in front of the mirror and in front of her mother, and she suffered because she knew that there was no escape; the reasons why the dress would not do were reasons which could never be communicated.
As the girls changed for the dance, giggling, excited, she had moments when she thought that she could not do it, that she would prefer to go in her skirt and jersey.
She knew she looked better in her skirt and jersey, but she had not the courage to wear them.
Then she thought that she would not go at all, that she would stay behind and pretend to be ill.
But she wanted to go.
The only dances she had ever been to had been school dances, and she wanted to go to this one.
So she put the dress on, and thought for a moment that perhaps it was not quite so frightful after all, and then, after looking at herself for a little longer, wondered if it were not in fact more frightful than she had ever imagined.
She hardly dared to draw the curtains to show herself to the other girls, though she had warned them of the horrid sight in store for them.
Pride always restrained her from describing her mother's attitudes in too much detail, and she tended rather to laugh them off, but nevertheless her friends had some shrewd notion of the situation.
She had described the dress to them, haltingly, trying to make her account amusing, searching desperately for a tone that would make its existence plain and casual and innocent to them, but she had not quite attained it; "My cousin Mavis," she had said, laughing.
 "You should just see her, you can't imagine, you would have to see her to know why she chose it," and all the time, as she spoke, some more assured, sophisticated account underran her words, silently, in her own mind, an account by some other girl, some girl who could wear such garments, and laugh at them, and explain them, and not suffer — some girl so far above such things that nothing could pull her down.
Some girl who would never need to make such explanations, some girl who had been bred in a world which did not admit such dresses.
And, when, finally, she did emerge from her curtain cubicle to face the other girls, they took it very well, for they could afford to be charitable, and they were secretly glad that Clara's style was cramped, for without some handicap she would have been a more serious threat.
So they greeted her with comforts and praise, and said they liked the colour, and Janice lent her a necklace; Clara did not much like the necklace either, for it was made of large artificial pearls, and she secretly suspected the donor of malicious intent in offering such a loan, but she  put it on just the same, and ignored her suspicions, and allowed herself to be comforted, because she wished to be comforted, and because it was too late to get out of going.
And when they got there, they found that both anticipation and anxiety had overestimated the occasion, for like the reception at the Hôtel de Ville, the dance was nothing but a stifling, uncomfortable, noisy, joyless crush.
The rooms provided were far too small for the thousands of English scholars who were crammed into them, and the originally excessive numbers were heavily augmented by gate-crashing French students who had been hanging around the fringes of the course all week trying to pick up girls at the Lycée doors.
There was a band, somewhere, but it could not be heard or seen.
There were soft drinks, somewhere, but they could not be reached.
The school parties stuck as rigidly together as they had done upon Victoria Station, lacking only their uniforms and labels, disastrously hampered by lack of space.
Clara's contingent sized up the situation in a disappointed trice, and hunched itself together in a corner to confront the disorderly scene by a solid front of backs.
Only Janice, eternally hopeful, kept her eye upon the possibilities; she perched herself, kneeling, upon a chair, so that at least her head could be seen above the crowd.
For three quarters of an hour they stood there, and bitterly complained and rejoiced in rumours of police intervention, faintings, and thefts and then, slowly, the floor began to clear a little.
They did not know whether it cleared because people had left voluntarily, or because people had been evicted, but clear it did.
and a few couples from the coeducational schools ventured forth to dance.
Janice, from her vantage point, managed to catch the eye of a boy to whom she had spoken on the boat, and terrorized, fascinated, he responded to her insinuations and oglings and came over to ask her for the pleasure of her hand.
At this, Rosie, Katie, Heather, Isabel and Clara felt themselves put upon their mettle, and they swerved round, slowly, to expose their disdainful faces.
The competition was, alas, horrific, as they had ill-advisedly placed themselves in a predominantly female quarter of the hall, where few boys were bold enough to venture.
However, after a couple of dances had elapsed, Clara thought she spotted the civilized  young man who had assisted her on the Channel crossing; once she had spotted him she turned rigidly away, so deep was her horror of imitating Janice's conduct, but she lost nothing by it, for within a couple of minutes he presented himself, courteously, at her elbow.
 "Hello," he said.
"I thought I saw you.
Isn't it the most shocking scrum?
Why do you imagine we all stay instead of going?"
 "I don't know," said Clara.
"Perhaps we just don't like to give up.
 "Do you feel like trying to have a dance?" he said.
 "It looks," she said nervously, "a little difficult." 
 "Oh, I don't know," he said.
"If you don't mind your toes being trampled on
She hesitated, sadly, desperately anxious to accept, absurdly delighted that he had asked her, that he had so coolly bothered to cross the room to ask her, and yet at the same time horrified by the thought of displaying herself, by the thought of dragging her hideous dress from its hole-in-the-corner obscurity, by the thought of dancing at all, for she did not know how to dance.
All the dancing that she had ever done had been at three school dances, and in sessions for instruction in the art of the polka, the mazurka, and the tarantella, and she did not think they would be much help to her now.
On the other hand, she did not feel that she could refuse him, because if she refused him, by what right and for what purpose had she gone there in the first place?
Such a false position was not for her, nor for her was the taunt of cowardice, so she smiled and assented, and allowed him to drag her into the sparsest area of the room.
It was not, as it happened, too bad.
The floor was so thickly covered that there was no space for displays of skill; the most that the most expert could do was to shuffle feebly back and forth.
Clara, clasped to the young man's bosom, reflected that he was in no position to notice her lack of grace.
Nor could he possibly notice her dipping hemline.
He held her quite tightly, and tried to prevent other people from banging into her.
His hair was thick and shining and symmetrical like a yellow flower.
She was proud of him, and of herself, but she was not too happy, for the strain was too great for happiness.
He too seemed to feel some sense of strain, for he was too busy avoiding  people to talk to her much; when he trod, helplessly, for the fifth time upon her foot, she stopped still, and said to him, lightly, and with a sense of great daring,
"It really is too bad, don't you think?
Don't you think we might give it up?"
The perfection of her tone, so perfectly deceitful and concealing, amazed her.
He stopped, and he seemed relieved.
 "It's dreadful," he said.
"I'm so sorry I keep treading on you, I just can't help it.
Should you mind if we went to look for something to drink instead?"
 "Is there anything?" she asked.
 "I thought I saw something," he said,"in one of the other rooms.
And so she followed him, in search of a drink.
She was delighted by the success of her bravery, because she was far happier talking than dancing.
She liked to be good at things, and she was not good at dancing.
They found some drinks, eventually, in a small beleaguered ante-room, where he fought his way through to the bar and acquired some fizzy orange.
 "Not much, I'm afraid," he said, as he returned modestly with his two bottles and straws, "but better than nothing." 
And they stood in a corner and drank them, and exchanged their names, at last: she much admired the clear way with which he presented his own.
Peter Harronson, he said he was called.
She thought the name faintly familiar, and faintly Scandinavian, but she did not like to ask where it came from, in case she should have known.
Similarly, when they exchanged the names of their schools, she found herself immensely relieved when he declared that he was at Winchester, for she had heard of Winchester, she knew something about Winchester, she did not have to feign a non-existent knowledge of Winchester.
Indeed, she was rather proud of the magnificent logic with which she countered his Winchester admission.
 "Ah, then," she said, sucking on her straw.
 "Then you must have been to Paris before." 
He did not even query her reasoning; he took it, for what it was.
 "Yes," he said, "once or twice, I have." 
 "Well, then," she continued, with what seemed to her to be  the very height of aware sophistication, "why ever did you want to come here on this sort of trip?" 
He seemed, strangely enough, to be very slightly disconcerted by her question.
 "Oh, I don't know," he said.
"I thought it might be amusing.
And then, you know, the others were coming.
And it gave one something to do with the holidays.
And there were those lectures, too.
They told me they'd be useful."
 "Did they really?" said Clara.
"I thought they were pretty dismal, didn't you?
I mean, really."
On this point, however, he did not follow her, for he clearly took her to be complaining of the endemic tediousness of all lectures, rather than of the inadequacy of this particular lot: he equally clearly did not wholly concede the point, for he said, faintly, falsely, without enthusiasm,"Oh yes, I suppose they were.
And she, warned off intellectual discussion by years of experience, withdrew, and could think of no more to say.
And he too seemed to have exhausted his conversational store; she thought that they would both have liked to continue talking, but they could think of nothing to say.
They were too young.
And in the silence, she grew more and more conscious of the impossibility of her dress, and of her scuffed and inappropriately coloured shoes, and of her warm face.
She wanted to get away, and she did not know how to get away.
All explanations, all excuses were crude and deadly, and she could not bring herself to make them, but she could not sit there either, contemplating her own slow lapse from grace.
She was immobile, cruelly transfixed, but in the very moment of immobility she saw most clearly a time when such moments need not be.
It was left to him to move.
He rose to his feet, and said:
"Should we go and see if there's any more room for dancing?
It might have cleared a little more by now."
And she too rose, and found herself saying, "Thank you so much, but if you don't mind I think I'd better go and see what's happened to my face." 
 "Of course," he said, "of Course ," and he even showed her the corridor that led to the Ladies' room, and she escaped, and they escaped from each other .
She stayed in the Ladies' room  for a long time, amongst girls fainting, and weeping and grieving over laddered stockings, and when she emerged he had disappeared.
She was wholly relieved that he had gone, for his absence enabled her safely to join her friends, to receive their questions and their anecdotes, and to hear of the brazen, wonderful audacity of Janice, who had not yet returned to the fold, and who had been seen leading, yes, leading her captive from the floor, in search of fresher air and darker night.
In bed that night, Clara thought of Peter Harronson and his fair hair.
And she thought of the Italian's hand inside her stocking.
And she thought of Walter Ash.
Her life, she thought, seemed to be thickening up quite nicely.
The next morning, they left Paris.
The station from which they departed was being cleaned, and she thought, what a strange thing to clean, a station.
What would they say in Northam, if anyone proposed to spend money on cleaning Northam Station?
And then, looking at the workmen, and the yellow emerging stone, she almost noticed that the station was not intended to be a station but a work of art, a building ambitiously decorated with scrolls and figures and carvings: ill-decorated, but decorated nonetheless.
That summer she gained a place at London University, and parted from Walter Ash.
Her parting from him took place in a field of buttercups and small cows; they had gone there together on their bicycles one hot afternoon, she with the intention of reading her book, and he with the intention of persuading her to remove as many of her clothes as possible.
They lay on his jacket, and she tried to read while he tried to kiss her.
She won.
After an hour the sun clouded over, so they picked up their things and started back towards the fence where they had left their bicycles.
At the far end of the field, by the gate, there was a group of small cows, and as Clara and Walter approached, these cows turned round to face them.
They were in a solid line, between them and the gate.
There were about twenty of them.
They did not move.
Walter and Clara slowed down.
Clara was frightened, but on the other hand she could see that they were only small cows.
They were not even small bullocks.
And she thought it was  quite intolerable for Walter Ash to hesitate, even though she herself found it necessary to hesitate.
She stood there, timidly, full of a most mordant rage.
Then, pained beyond belief in some tender pride, she advanced alone upon the cows, and they parted softly and meekly before her and Walter Ash followed her, and they regained their bicycles.
And she thought, quite calmly: this isn't good enough for me, I shall get further if I'm pulled, I can't waste time in going first.
When Walter Ash rang her the next day she would not speak to him.
She returned his letters unopened, and threw away his small gifts.
She stayed indoors for the rest of the summer, lying on her bed, trying to read.
Clara knew that Clelia would contact her, and she did.
Less than a week after their first meeting at the poetry reading, she found a message waiting for her, asking her to ring Clelia's number, and she rang, and Clelia invited herself round to tea.
 "I would ask you to come here," she said, "but there seems to be some kind of disturbance going on, and I don't want to add to it." 
 "Oh, that's all right," said Clara, "do please come here, I should like you to come here." 
And she meant it, for she liked her college room, she was even mildly proud of it, and the thought of entertaining Clelia in it did not alarm her, though she had a deep aversion to the notion of entertainment, and had never in her whole three years at University embarked on the ritual tea parties or more ambitious sherry parties that mark the social life of such establishments.
It was not so much meanness that restrained her, as a profound mistrust of her own organizations: and also she felt obscurely, that to invite people into her own room was to condemn them to boredom and unease.
She recognized that this feeling was in part a hangover from her schooldays, when her occasional invitations to friends had invariably resulted in sessions of strained discomfort, presided over by the disapprobation, however concealed, of her mother; she had no precedent for successful hospitality.
She had conquered this feeling sufficiently to allow her to accept visits from her friends, and had overcome the apologetic murmurs that used to assail her as she opened her bedroom door; she felt, in part, absolved by the wonderfully institutional shape of her room, which was on the third floor of a large block in the middle of Regents Park.
The room was what it was, one of many, it  meant nothing, it spoke of nothing, it betrayed her in no way.
She enjoyed its lack of significance, much as she had enjoyed the bleak and dirty corridors of Battersby Grammar School when she was eleven years old.
She made no attempts to decorate it, to domesticate it, to possess it; she let it be, and her things lay in it.
Some of her friends bought cushions and pictures and even, extravagantly, curtains, in an effort to make rooms look homely, and though she liked the results, she viewed the aim with contempt.
As she sat and waited for Clelia, she looked out across the park, at the spring trees, and tried to concentrate on her Spanish.
and thought of what she should do next, without this view, without the solace of a yearly grant, without the irreproachable (or now, through custom, irreproachable) excuse of study.
Her Finals were approaching, and she had no idea of what she should do next, and indeed did not dare to think about the future for she knew that it offered her little in the way of readily acceptable projects.
Her friends, all equally indecisive, had no need to hurry their decisions, for nothing lay at their backs, pulling them, sucking them, dragging at their sleeves and at their hems.
But Clara knew that her mother expected her to go home.
The thought of going home was for her the final impossibility, but she could not see any satisfactory way of avoiding it.
She could not see why her mother wanted her, nor what she expected her to do in Northam, and whenever she mentioned the subject to others they exclaimed in horror, commiserating with her, telling her that she must be firm, never for half a moment assuming that she could or would really do it.
She said to them, sometimes, but she's a widow, she lives all alone, she has no one, she seems to expect it of me: and they sympathized all the more, and said that they could see how hard it must be for Clara to break away.
But nobody ever so much as hinted at the possibility that she might return.
They all assumed, blandly, blithely, that she must stay in London, or go abroad; that the guilt must be endured, and no question about it.
Most of the time Clara assumed it too.
Her years in London bad merely strengthened her desire to live there for the rest of  her life, and while she was there her mother seemed, most of the time, to be no more that a dreadful past sorrow, endured and survived.
But then there were always the vacations.
Clara dreaded the vacations, and tried to whittle them down as much as she could, by semi-obligatory study courses, and quasi-essential trips to the continent to learn the languages she was studying, but despite these nibblings and thefts, she still found herself obliged to spend a great deal of time each year in Hartley Road.
She had neither the money, nor, finally, the nerve to stay away.
And these visits managed to reduce her to exactly the same stage of trembling, silent, frustrated anxiety that she had endured throughout her childhood; she felt, each time, that she had gone back, right back to the start, and that every step forward must be painfully retraced.
It was not so, at the beginning of each new term she found it was not so, but it seemed to be so, and the same mixture of guilt and hate and sorrow would strike her anew, each time as forcefully, each time she got off the train at Northam Station.
She found that she was not alone in her vacational penances, and that many of her friends endured similar harsh shocks and grating transitions, but she was alone in the way she took it.
For she found herself incapable of struggling against it, as others did; while at home, she made no efforts to alleviate her lot.
She sought no friends; she shut herself off, in the old familiar world of bedroom and drawing room, and her only amusement, for weeks on end, was the reading of her set texts.
She lived in the house.
as though there had never been another world, and when a boy she knew, who lived in Doncaster, asked if he could come over and take her out, she refused him, although she liked him, because she knew that she could not bear to allow herself to emerge.
And so she continued, through three years, through a series of such violent changes; she inspected herself anxiously from time to time for signs of manic-depression or schizophrenia, but she could find nothing but symptoms of increasingly quick recovery.
In her first year, it took her a day or two to settle down to London, but in her last year she was there the moment she stepped on the train.
Nevertheless, she did not see that she could leave Northam for ever.
She felt herself restrained from such freedom.
And  she sought, faintly, for compromise, for some way of life that would enable her to see her mother as often as a sense of duty obliged.
She never allowed herself to suspect that duty might oblige her to return entirely, but the idea lay in the back of her head, as of some final, exhausting, bleeding martyrdom.
She shunned it, she avoided it, but she could occasionally feel herself blench as she caught a rash and unguarded glimpse of it.
She did not believe that she would ever do it, for she told herself that she was free; she thought that she would probably end by prolonging, in some way, her present situation, by returning for vacations and for long dead summers.
Such a summer now stared her in the face, for she had, through indecision, failed to fix herself up any foreign excursions; she looked towards it and towards her approaching examinations, and felt sadly weak.
Clelia's visit, however, was all that she had hoped for.
She arrived most promptly, sat down on the bed, and proceeded to tell Clara the story of her life.
It was an impressive narrative, and impressively narrated; Clara found her craving for the bizarre and the involved richly satisfied.
The picture that emerged was highly confusing, because she could not follow all its references, despite Clelia's efforts to explain herself; she found it impossible to sort out the complications of Clelia's family, which seemed to contain, as well as a poet father, an equally if not more famous mother, and a large number of strangely named children.
The mother puzzled Clara particularly, for Clelia evidently assumed that she needed no description or definition, and spoke of her as one whose name is a household word.
Clara, already familiar with children of famous parents, and with children who believed their parents to be famous, could not believe that Clelia's assumption was ill-founded, yet she could not even locate the field of Mrs Denham's distinction.
She hid more success with the identities of various names that had been puzzling her since their last encounter, and most satisfactorily of all, she placed the baby.
The baby belonged to a man called Martin, who ran (or owned, or managed) the gallery where Clelia worked.
Clara was not at all sure what a gallery was, but from the conversation she managed to deduce that it dealt in paintings, and unlike the  Tate and the National Gallery, dealt commercially.
Clelia worked there because she painted: also because her parents pulled strings: also because she had been to art school: also because she had some highly inexplicit connexion with Martin.
All these explanations were proffered, haphazardly, one on top of the other, and from the excess of explanation Clara concluded that a job in a gallery such as Clelia's must be something of a sinecure, and that Clelia's attitude towards it was not wholly happy.
The nature of her job there was, to Clara, wholly obscure, but then the nature of most jobs was obscure to her.
Martin had managed to inspire some kind of admiration in Clelia, and had enlisted her sympathy in the cause of his dissolving marriage.
 "It wasn't that I was in love with him, you know," she said, from time to time, as chorus to her main argument, "it wasn't as though I was in love with him, you know." 
However, love or no love, Martin had arrived at the gallery one morning, with his small baby in his arms, and the news that his wife had left him, and the clear expectation of help of some kind from Clelia.
Clelia had provided help, instantly, by holding the baby, and looking after it, and changing, with increasing expertise, its nappy, and then at the end of the day she had invited Martin and his child home.
She seemed somewhat defensive about this stage in her narrative, and said,"Well, after all, what on earth was I to do?
He really is so peculiarly helpless, and I couldn't have let him take it home all by himself, could I?
I felt I had to do something, he seemed to expect me to do something".
So Martin and his abandoned baby had moved into the Denham household, and they had moreover stayed there.
They had arrived before Christmas, and it was now May.
 "We simply don't know what to do about them," said Clelia.
"It isn't, after all, as though we had any reason for not having them, because now that Amelia and Magnus and Gabriel are all married there's plenty of room, and my parents are anyway worried, politically speaking if you know what I mean, about having so much empty house (though he's hardly the kind of tenant that that kind of consideration would provide), and he even pays some rent from time to time.
But then, being so rich, he could easily go and live somewhere else.
But he doesn't, and my mother won't tell him to go, because she's never in her life told anyone to go, it isn't in her, but he's grinding her into the ground, she can't work, she can't concentrate, he keeps talking to her all the time, and the baby cries, and it upsets her, for all that she keeps saying it doesn't, and that it takes her back to the happiest years of her life, when we were all in plastic pants, I suppose she means, except I think we all had to wear wet woolly leggings, she had this thing about plastic pants being unhealthy."
 "Why doesn't your father tell him to go?" asked Clara, for from what she could recollect of Mr Denham, she could not picture him suffering fools gladly.
"Oh, he just doesn't.
He doesn't like to interfere.
I think truly, he thinks I must be in love with him, and he doesn't want to complicate things."
 "But you're not, are you?" said Clara.
 "Well, it isn't exactly as though I'm not," said Clelia.
 "I mean, it isn't as though I wanted to get rid of him." 
 "I see," said Clara, feeling that maybe indeed she did.
Her eyes were rapidly adjusting to such tones.
And then Clelia sighed heavily, and looked sadly at Clara's Japanese wooden egg puzzle, which she had been trying all this while to do, and said, "How very dull for you, to hear all about my affairs, but I do so like to tell the story of my life, it makes me feel as though things hive re ally happened to me, whereas otherwise they seem not to happen." 
 "It wasn't dull," said Clara,"there is nothing, nothing that I wanted to hear more.
 "Is that true?" said Clelia, frowning intently at the egg, not risking the raising of her eyes, as though truly diffident, suddenly diffident.
"I am glad if you mean it.
I think I must be like my mother, she is always letting herself be interviewed, my father says its vulgar, but she likes it, she likes people coming to ask her questions about herself and how she makes coffee and who she his to dinner and what kind of paper she writes on, she says it makes her feel as though she really has got somewhere in her life.
It consoles her, without it she says she feels she hasn't moved.
And she likes telling people things, she  doesn't mind who she talks to, total strangers, interviewers, so long as its professional, so long as it's not personal.
When it's personal, she gets confused.
So perhaps I felt I must tell you all this, now, before I know you better, so that I can tell it you without too much confusion.
And now I have told you, you must talk now, tell me about yourself."
 "There doesn't seem to be so much to tell," said Clara.
 "How can you say that, how can you say that," said Clelia,"by saying that you are condemning me, you're criticizing me, you're implying that I talk too much, God knows I do, but surely you could do better?
Do tell me, believe me that in me you have the best audience of your life, you will never find as good an audience as me."
And so Clara told Clelia, in return, some of her own history, and in telling it, she seemed to find, strangely and more securely than ever a tone that absolved her, a tone that redeemed her past from meanness and humiliations, so that she even found herself able to speak of her own mother without evasion.
For Clelia was, as she had claimed, a good audience: she listened with an attention that picked up the faintest vibrations of meaning.
And Clara, confident that she would meet with no misunderstanding, managed to relate episodes that she had never before related, and when, finally, she came to the subject of the future, she awaited Clelia's views as though they might even be of use.
She even asked her for them; she asked her what she thought she should do.
 "What a problem," said Clelia, contemplating it.
 "What about the rest of the family, what about your brothers, don't they help?" 
 "One of them went to Australia," said Clara,"and the other one is married, and lives right the other side of town.
She has nobody, she really has nobody."
 "And she thinks you should go home?" 
"She doesn't say so, but at times I think she expects me to although she knows I can't.
We never talk about it: we never talk about anything though so the fact that we don't talk about that doesn't mean much.
But I think.
all the same, that she wants me at home, though she doesn't like me, and she could never admit that she might need me…"
 "I know what you should do," said Clelia,"you should do a Diploma of Education or whatever it's called.
And then you could go on going home for the vacations.
They give you money to do those, don't they?"
 "I thought of that," said Clara,"but I don't know if I would want to teach.
And anyway, I don't want to go home for vacations."
 "Evidently not," said Clelia,"but evidently you feel you ought.
And I consider it unadvisable to lay too great a strain upon one's conscience.
Far better to compromise in my view."
 "How extraordinary to hear you say that," said Clara,"I was expecting you to say what all my other friends say, that I must clear out quick, be ruthless, cut all ties, leave her to it, live my own life.
You know the kind of things that people say."
 "People are always telling other people to do that kind of thing," said Clelia,"it must give them a vicarious thrill.
Because they never do it themselves, haven't you noticed?
I never tell anyone to do anything.
I haven't the nerve, I Just encourage people to go on doing what they're already doing anyway.
 "But even if I did it," said Clara,"I would be stealing the state's money, wouldn't I?
By doing a Dip Ed without meaning to teach?"
 "Who knows?" said Clelia.
"You might even want to teach at the end of it.
And you can't consider everyone, you know.
You can't feel for both the State and your mother, can you?"
 "As a matter of fact," said Clara,"I did put my name down to do a Dip Ed.
I thought that anyway it would always come in useful.
And kill time, if you see what I mean.
 "So you see," said Clelia,"you had made your mind up anyway.
You're doing it in London, I trust."
 "Of course," said Clara, "where else?" 
 "Where else indeed?" said Clelia.
"I'm glad you'll be back.
And I'm frightfully sorry, but I seem to have completely disorganized this egg.
Have I ruined it beyond repair?
I used to think I was quite good at that kind of thing
 "It's just a trick, really, it's easy," said Clara, and she took back the egg, and found that she could not put it together again either, so they decided to abandon it, and left it in little pieces in a glass dish on the mantelpiece with some dry and coloured  gourds, and then they went downstairs and out into the park, and walked towards the bus stop, and Clara explained, lest the gourds and the egg should be thought to reflect in any way on herself, that they had been given to her by a friend the week before, to celebrate her twenty-second birthday.
It was a dark cloudy day; there had been as yet no spring, and the grass was muddy from constant rain.
They waited together at the bus stop for Clelia's bus, and as the bus approached Clelia said confirming, "Next Sunday, then, you'll come and see us?" 
Clara nodded and agreed.
And as Clara walked back towards her college hostel, she thought about Clelia, and wondered whether she dealt out all her friendships with so lavish a hand, or whether, once more in her life, she could count on some peculiar blessing.
She had met people of this genre before — intense, smart, well-connected, impulsive, communicative, insatiably interested in the affairs of others — and she would, she supposed, upon interrogation, have classed herself, at least in aspiration, as one of the genre.
But she had never before met such qualities so mildly and tactfully and decoratively combined, so settled and established, so kindly displayed.
She looked back over her three years at college, now slowly approaching their close, and she thought of all the people she had known and all the friends she had made, and it seemed to her that most of them had been aiming with varying degrees of accuracy at just such an effect.
She had, and she felt slightly uneasy about admitting it, she had sought the smartly intense, at the expense of the more solid and dowdy virtues; she had been attracted by surfaces, by clothes and manners and voices and trivial strange graces, and she had imitated what she had seen of these things in others.
She was drawn unquestionably to the appearance of things, though she was aware that she had as yet much ground to cover, and that she had followed many a false trail; she remembered with particular regret the quantities of eyeshadow which she had once thought desirable, and the pendant earrings of the same epoch.
She also knew that some of her preferences were base in the extreme, and that her affection for Peter de Salis sprang at the first most ignobly from his delightful name.
She liked him, too, for being a poet, and for taking her out to things, but she often  wondered whether her interest in his poetry were not as superficial as her interest in his name.
She seemed to live by an instinct which drew her strongly and on the whole accurately towards such manifestations, such hints and echoes of a grander world, and which yet at the same time could not approve them.
But Clelia, she could see, was secure beyond approval or disapproval: she was what she was, whatever that might be.
She looked forward to discovering what it might be, and how it might have been created.
When she got back to the college, she went to the library and looked once more at all the reference books pertaining to Sebastian Denham, in the hope of finding the nature of his wife's professional distinctions, but she was not successful.
The biographies were terse and restrained, as far as his private life was concerned, and effusive only about the names and quality of his publications She thought that she might ring Peter de Salis, and ask him about Mrs Denham, but she did not want to do this, in case Mrs Denham was a lady of such fame that ignorance of her would prove to be positively compromising.
So she did nothing.
She thought she would wait, and see what happened.
The Denhams' house, like the Maughams' house at 23 Hartley Road, Woodgrove, Northam, was semi-detached.
But Clara, upon her first visit, could find no other possible point of resemblance, and even this point she missed, so different was the architecture and the attachment from anything she had ever before approached.
It was a large, tall, four storeyed building, on one of the steep hillsides of Highgate; it had been built in 1720, but was deceptively flanked by scrappy houses and miscellaneous buildings of mixed and later dates, so that its lonely eminence had an air of somewhat tragic survival.
In front of the building was a large paved double courtyard, which was level, despite the steep gradient of the hill; it was separated from the pavement by a high, elaborate, wrought iron fence, the gate of which stood fortunately open.
Clara would not have liked to wrestle with its huge ornate metallic bolt.
The building had two front doors, side by side, one for each house, and the  steps up to each door were not divided; an urn full of some kind of greenery stood in the middle of the steps, but there was no attempt at distinction.
It was this lack of division that most effectively concealed from Clara the basic, classic structure of the building, for she had been brought up with the notion that walls must be above eye-level, lace curtains impenetrable, bedrooms facing discreetly into the void.
Once she had visited a friend who had a room in a house in North London; she had accompanied her friend into the small back garden, and had been deeply shocked to find that the walls dividing the row of small terraced gardens were only two feet high.
A child could have seen over them: rows of small children were in fact busy looking over them as she stood there, and looking moreover without disguise at her.
She retired quickly after her friend into the kitchen, overcome by a sense of invaded privacy; a garden, to her, was not meant for such intimacies.
The door of the Denhams' house was painted black, and it was solid, and heavily panelled; in the centre of the middle panel there was a lion's head with a brass ring in its mouth.
There was also a bell, and Clara chose the bell.
She had to wait for some time before the door was opened, and she hoped very much that it would be opened by Clelia, but it was not; it was opened by a thin, brown, balding, youngish looking man.
He looked at her, and said nothing.
 "I've come to see Clelia," said Clara, standing on the doorstep.
The man gulped nervously, and nodded, and said, "Clelia, oh yes, Clelia, just a moment, I'll go and get her." 
And he disappeared.
Clara, uninvited, thought she might as well step in, so she did.
The hall into which she stepped was not a hall at all, but a large and very high room, with doors leading off it in most directions, and it was so full of unexpected things that she found it hard to know where to look first.
The floor was tiled, in diagonal squares of grey and white marble, and the walls were so densely covered with pictures and looking glasses that it was hard to tell whether or how they were papered, but the general tone and impression was of a deep purple and red.
At the far end of the hall there was a marble fireplace, and under it was a large pot of dying Bowers and a  very beautiful rocking horse.
The petals of the flowers had dropped, and spilled brown and carelessly over the floor.
There was also, she vaguely noted, in one corner a piano, and the windows had shutters of a kind that she had never seen in England.
After a while, Clelia appeared, from one of the doors at the far end of the hall.
She was wearing glasses, and trousers, and a pink shirt with embroidered flowers, and she looked rather frightening, and Clara half wished that she had not come.
As she approached, Clara thought that she still looked cross, but she could see that whatever annoyance was there was not directed against herself.
 "Well, I came," she said.
 "So I see," said Clelia.
"I'm glad you came.
It's been a most shocking day so far, quite shocking.
Let's go up into my room, the garden's full of Martin and my mother squabbling.
Or not squabbling.
We can watch them through the window.
 "Who was that that let me in?" said Clara, following Clelia meekly up the staircase, and up and up, to the second floor.
 "That was Martin," said Clelia.
"What did you think of him?
He's rather lovely, don't you think?"
Clara could not think of any scheme in which the man she had just seen could have been described as lovely, but she instantly invented one.
 "Yes," she said.
 "And this," said Clelia, suddenly throwing open a high white door,"is my room.
And she said it with such pride and such display that Clara did not feel at all obliged to conceal the amazement and delight that she felt, as she might, if confronted with a more worldly modesty, have done: for Clelia's manner declared, this is singular this is beautiful, this may legitimately amaze, you betray no innocence in admiring this.
And it was, by any standards, amazing.
It was a tall, square room, facing towards the back of the house and garden, and it was full and overflowing with a profusion of the most diverse and wonderful objects, so full that the room's function for it was, beneath all, a bedroom — was all but concealed.
Clara, when she looked hard, could just descry a bed, almost lost beneath a grey and pink flowered cover, a heap of books, and a large half-painted canvas.
There were a good many books in the room; one wall was lined with them, and they lay in heaps on chairs and on the floor.
There was a plant, which grew and blossomed along the picture rail, and climbed down a picture cord to embrace the frame of a small oil painting of naked nymphs; there was the end of a brass bedstead, upon which other plants clambered and flowered.
There were photographs and postcard and letters pinned up and pasted on tables and walls, and amongst these more adult decorations, there was also a great quantity of carefully arranged and ancient toys, of a precise and coloured charm; there was a doll's house, a glass jar of marbles, a toy iron on a small brass stand, a heap of rag dolls, a row of painted wooden Russian dolls, a nest of coloured eggs, a tower of bricks, a weather house, a huge pendant snowstorm globe containing a small palace and a small forest with small ferny trees.
Clara was staggered and bewitched; she had never in her life seen anything like it.
Such a vision had never so much as crossed her mind.
Some of her friends had fairly eccentric ideas of bed-sitter decoration, and had done far better than the Chianti-bottle, British Railway-poster effort, but none of them had ever conceived of anything like this: and the nicest room she had ever seen had been the drawing room of a friend's mother in Sevenoaks, which had been distinguished by a bare and gentle colour scheme, and some pretty Georgian furniture.
It was not for some time, and after some acquaintance, that she got round to thinking that one of the most charming features of Clelia's room was its sense of prolonged nursery associations.
The childhood objects were not only lovely in themselves, they were a link with some past and pleasantly remembered time, a time not violently shrugged off and rejected, but a time to be lived with, in happy recollection, a time which could well bear remembering.
Clelia did not pretend not to be delighted by Clara's delight.
 "I'm so glad you like it," she said.
"I think it's so lovely.
I like it so much.
Some people think that it goes too far, but I don't see that it does, do you?"
 "I don't see how you can go too far, in the right direction," said Clara, not for the sake of saying it, but because, on some level, she profoundly believed it to be true.
They stayed in the bedroom for half an hour or so, talking, looking at the things, talking: and Clara remembered thinking at the time that it was just such a honeysuckle-filtered, sunny conversational afternoon that would in years to come, whatever those years might bring, cause her the most sad and exquisite nostalgia.
She was sad in advance, and yet at the same time all the happier, doubly happy, for knowing that she recognized her happiness, that it was not slipping by her unheeded, for knowing that she was creating for herself a past.
She found Clelia's company extraordinarily entertaining, and bracing only in so far as she liked to be braced: she could hardly follow a word, for instance, of the art references in her conversation, but Clelia managed somehow to combine a great air of erudition and abstruseness with a marked facility for making explanations, so that ignorance was no bar to amusement.
She was puzzled only by the unmistakable largesse of the confidence proffered to her, because try as she might, she could not persuade herself that Clelia could talk like this, so wittily and intimately and inquiringly, to everyone; she could not believe that she could talk like this to many.
And she even dropped from time to time the odd and flattering hint about the unique nature of her interest.
So that Clara, although she found it hard to believe that she herself was thus chosen, had no alternative to believing it.
And once she had admitted that it might be possible, she could see that all the evidence pointed clearly in that one direction.
So she thought that she might take it on trust.
For, after all, it was not humility that restrained her from believing herself to be at first sight infinitely interesting, for she believed herself to be the equal even of Clelia Denham: it was simply a deference to the law of probability.
And the law of probability seemed, for once, to have slipped up, and to have permitted her a striking piece of good luck.
Clara's first glance of Candida Denham was through Clelia's high bedroom window.
From this vantage point, she could not see much, except the top of her head, and the colour of her clothes.
She was sitting on a rug on the long narrow lawn which  lay behind the house, with a pile of books and a baby.
Her hair was black, like her daughter's, and seemed to be cut in much the same shape, and she was wearing a purple dress.
The baby was wearing a pink frilly garment on its top half, and nothing at all, as far as she could see, on its bottom half, but she could not see very well.
From the pink frilly garment, Clara would have deduced that the baby must be a girl, but she clearly remembered that it was called James.
The baby's father, who was the man called Martin, was sitting a little way off on a deckchair, chewing an unlit pipe, and reading one of the Sunday papers.
There seemed to be no signs of a squabble, but Clara was herself familiar with silent domestic altercation, and was willing to believe that the charmingly grouped apparent peace of the scene belied its true character.
 "It's quite a nice garden, really," said Clelia, watching.
"There's another bit, on a lower level there are some steps going down.
And there are steps going down from the drawing room, and up from the dining room.
It's because of the steepness of the hill, it's all terraced.
People can never get used to the levels.
When we were little we were only allowed to play on the lower bit, in case we fell over this top wall, and it was like a dirt track down there, with bikes and trucks and lord knows what.
And we all used to climb up and fall over the top anyway.
Gabriel had five stitches, and he's still got a scar.
But I suppose it kept the bikes off the top bit.
They're trying to make the bottom bit look decent now, they keep buying things for it, but it never looks right you can't see it from here, we'll go out and look at the garden after tea."
And as she spoke, Mrs Denham, in the garden below, suddenly leaped to her feet, and started gathering up her things; they could not catch what she was saying, but she seemed faintly agitated, and Martin too got to his feet, though not with any movement that could be described as a leap, and appeared to offer, though ineffectively, to help with his baby.
Mrs Denham refused his offer, and tucked the baby under one arm, and started to drag the blanket she had been sitting on after her into the house.
Martin offered to have that too, but was instructed to pick up her books instead, so be did.
And they all went in.
 "I think it must be tea time," said Clelia.
 "I think we'd better go down." 
And Clara, as she went down, felt that perhaps her nervousness was just about to outweigh her anticipation.
She hoped very much that it would not, for she wanted to enjoy herself: she hoped that Mrs Denham would not be alarming.
She felt suddenly, hopelessly guilty for not having found out all about Mrs Denham before arriving.
And she also felt slightly nervous lest the large house should suddenly disgorge many other hidden residents, for what would she do if suddenly confronted, at one go, with Amelia, Magnus, Gabriel, and Annunciata, and all their varying wives and husbands?
But when they reached the drawing room, the only people there were Mrs Denham and Martin, and the baby, which was sitting in a high chair.
 "Hello," said Mrs Denham.
"There you both are.
I wondered if you were coming down."
 "This is Clara, mama," said Clelia.
 "Clara, yes," said Mrs Denham.
"Clelia told me about you.
Do git down, have a cup of tea.
I would have called Clelia Clara if I'd thought of it, but I didn't.
But I'm sure that that was what I was somehow looking for.
To go with Amelia.
But then I got led astray, and went and did that awful thing to poor Annunciata."
 "I think Annunciata is a beautiful name," said Clelia, taking up once more what was quite evidently a familiar theme.
"And she truly likes it, you know, herself.
She always did."
 "I think I must have been mad," said Mrs Denham, taking off the tea pot lid and staring nervously into its smoky silver depths.
"And they went and called her Nancy at school.
Like something out of Swallows and Amazons.
Clelia, give James a crust, he's just about to start to moan.
And sure enough, just as Clelia ripped a crust from a piece of bread and butter, the baby started to make groaning hungry noises, clenching and unclenching its fists, with histrionic desire.
 "I'm not at all pleased with James," said Mrs Denham.
"He's just peed all over my review copy of that book on Fanny Burney.
And I was going to sell it to Harrods, it's such an awful  book, I really had decided to sell it to Harrods.
But I don't suppose Harrods will want it now James has peed on it, will they?"
"You shouldn't let him lie around without his nappy on, said Clelia severely.
 "Oh, I don't know," said Mrs Denham.
"I feel so sorry for them, all bundled up and soggy.
And when it's such a fine day, for once, one ought to let them kick.
It was my fault, I shouldn't have let him be so near.
Girls are so much easier, if you put them on a blanket at least all they do is wet it.
But boys have such a long range, Clelia, do pick up that crust.
No, give it back to him, he won't mind.
I'm sure he didn't mean to drop it.
Clara, will you have milk or lemon?"
 "Lemon, please," said Clara.
And as she stirred her cup of tea, and sipped it, she lost track of the conversation entirely, so engrossed was she in the visual aspect of the scene presented to her: she did not know where first to look, so dazzling and amazing were the objects and vistas and arrangements before her.
The room itself would have been enough to efface any human material less striking than Clelia's mother, and it did indeed more or less totally efface the unobtrusive Martin, who sat quietly dissociated, perched on the edge of a gilt-framed armchair, looking as though he did not quite mean to be there.
It was a large, high, long room, and so full of furniture and mirrors and pictures and books and chandeliers and hangings and refracted angles of light that the eye could at first glimpse in no way assess its dimensions; it was like some infinitely more complicated and elaborate and intentional version of the hall which Clara had first entered.
It seemed to be full of alcoves and angles and small grouped areas of being, though the room itself was a plain rectangle: fish swam in a high globe, a monstrously enlarged goldfish bowl on top of a bookcase, and flowers and foliage stood on small pedestals here and there.
Over the marble mantelpiece was a huge oval gold mirror, with an eagle adorning it, and beneath it two gilt and delicate sprays of candle brackets.
The floor was wooden, and polished, but most of it was covered by a large, intricately patterned and badly frayed coloured carpet.
On one wall hung a large picture of a classical, mythological nature: on another wall was an equally large picture of undulating pale yellow and beige lines.
The third wall was lined entirely with books, and the wall that looked over the garden was not a wall but a window, heavily shrouded with curtains of different fabrics and densities.
Clara was astonished; she could compare the room to nothing in her experience, nothing at all, unless it were perhaps to those studiously, tediously visited ancient homes which she had been round on various bank holidays during her childhood.
And having arrived at so much in the way of a comparison, she saw, suddenly revealed to her, how much there had been in those other rooms to admire.
She had always disliked them, had never for a moment been able to see their virtues; she had been bored by the classical, and had felt a positive, righteous contempt for the baroque and the neo-Gothic.
She had thought the quantities of gilt (never did she credit that it might be real gold) an evidence of shocking vulgarity, had sneered at the bad taste of the ornate picture frames, at the ridiculous excesses of the pictures themselves, and had felt a solid, suburban scorn for the frayed and patched tapestry chair seats and the faded hangings: she had wondered why, if so rich, they did not throw out their tatty Persian coverings, and buy themselves a good bit of fitted Wilton or Axminster in a good plain colour.
And now, suddenly, stunningly confronted, she saw, if not the details, at least the nature of her errors.
For this room was the real thing: so much was unmistakable.
Just as Clelia's particular combination of virtues could never have been arrived at by fraud, so this room could never have been created out of ignorance or servile imitations.
And if this room was real, so might the others have been.
The aristocratic ideal was vindicated.
She stared at the golden eagle, so arrogantly and eternally poised, and wondered why she had ever thought birds on furniture were a bit off: why had she never bothered to look, why had she never asked herself what her eyes had told her?
Why had she had to wait for such an education?
The eagle was so evidently, so ferociously beautiful; one would have thought that it could have impressed itself upon the most unwilling beholder.
She wondered how many other such eagles she had blindly passed.
Mrs Denham herself made a fitting occupant for such a room, poised equally between frayed charm and the austere splendour of riches.
After the initiation of Clelia, she was to  Clara less Surprising than she might otherwise have been, for the resemblance between mother and daughter was marked: the features were the same, though worn and lined by grooves deeper than mere wrinkles: the set of the conscious, curious head was the same, and the hair was the same, though streaked with white, and hanging with the benefits of expense, as well as of style.
Clara had never seen such securely straight hair on so old a woman; even the more fashion-conscious of the middle aged lecturers at her college were adorned with the permanent waves of their generation.
Nor had she ever seen such a dress on anyone over the age of thirty, but seeing it, she had to admit that it did not even look bizarre: it was a pale purple smock, waistless and bustless, with long, much-buttoned sleeves, and yet it managed to give only the faintest, most delicate air of Bohemia.
Mrs Denham wore heavily-rimmed glasses, and she took them off from time to time, restlessly, as she talked: the crows' feet round her eyes were deeply scored, and her eyes without their glasses had a distant, worried look, as though committed to far other fields of concentration.
And yet, when she talked, she seemed to be there, and with them; she did not seem to be elsewhere.
She talked of books, from what Clara, in her haze of observation, could hear: about some books that she was, ah yes, what was that word, reviewing? a critic, then?
No, not a critic: her attitude to her present undertaking was too anxious, too casual, to be the attitude of a weekly employee.
A writer, then, perhaps: and Clara, searching for help, directed her excellent vision at the distant titles of the books on the shelves behind Martin's head.
And help was forthcoming, for there was a whole row of somehow familiar books, and the name on the back, she could just decipher it, was Candida something, why yes, of course, Candida Gray, she saw it with a flash of inspiration, for it had never occurred to her to look for a surname other than the one that she already knew.
Candida Gray, Candida Gray, a name that she had known for as many years as she had known any such names; she had not read as many of the novels as she ought to have done, but she had read one at least, and that one she actually remembered.
In the sudden satisfaction of recognition, Clara nearly cried out, into the  midst of the conversation, I read your book, I read that book of yours, I read Custom and Ceremony: but she didn't, she kept quiet, she did not want to betray, even directly, the novelty of her discovery.
And she thought, a little aggrieved: I do think Clelia might have told me, how could she assume that I knew her mother's maiden name?
Or does everyone know such things but me?
Of course they don't, and she should have known that if anyone didn't, it would be me.
This is what she said to herself, but at the same time she was alarmed, faintly alarmed by the implication that everyone did know such things.
She had a long way, still, to go.
Her discovery did, however, although belated, do much to help her understanding of the conversation: references hitherto obscure became suddenly clear.
She began to feel that she knew where she was, a little: and after a while she too began to talk.
And they talked to her, most politely: the Martin man asked her when she was doing her Finals, and she told him, and he asked her what she was going to do then, and she said that she thought she would do a teacher's training course.
 "But will you teach?" asked Mrs Denham anxiously.
 "I don't suppose so," said Clara, "but it makes a qualification, doesn't it?" 
 "I used to teach," said Mrs Denham,"but I was always so afraid of being boring that I could never talk for long enough.
One has to do so much talking, and I don't like talking.
Or only to people.
I suppose you will probably get married, will you?"
 "I never seem to feel like getting married," said Clara.
 "That's what Clelia says," said Mrs Denham.
 "And she has good reason to say so when she looks at what has happened to all the rest of them." 
 "Why, what has happened to them?" said Clara, who felt such a question to be not impertinent but positively requested.
 "They all got married," said Mrs Denham,"all except the little one, and she's still at Oxford.
The eldest one couldn't have children, and quarrels with her husband, and has gone dotty because she can't have children, and wanders around in a very odd coat all the time.
She lives in the country, it must be a mistake.
Then the second one got married, and he's got four  children, and the third got married, and he's got three children, and they're both going dotty because they've got too many.
Aren't they, Clelia?"
 "No more than most other people, I don't suppose," said Clelia.
 "But you must admit," said her mother, "that it's put you off." 
 "No it hasn't," said Clelia.
 "And look at me, I've managed to pick up a baby without even getting married, haven't I, Jamesie?" 
And she gave the baby a lump of sugar.
 "The maternal impulse in your family tends to run riot," said Martin, "don't you think?" 
 "And a good thing for you that it does," said Clelia, with a sudden asperity,"or you'd be out on your ear.
She said this with a certain violence, and Clara's attention quickened, for she thought she was about to witness the emergence of one of the buried conflicts of which she had heard so much: but Mrs Denham said quickly, "For goodness sake, Clelia, you know how good it is for me to have James around, it takes me back to those lovely days when you were all so small and docile." 
 "What rubbish," said Clelia.
"You know he gets on your nerves.
 "No he doesn't," said Mrs Denham.
"I like babies, why do you think I had so many?
And he's a kind of consolation prize to me, in my change of life."
 "I'm sure you didn't have so many because you liked them," said Clelia.
 "You used to shout at us all the time." 
 "Why, as a matter of interest," said Martin, calmly, as though the discussion up to this point had been quite unreliable, "did you have so many children, Candida?" and Mrs Denham, strangely, took off her glasses, and frowned, and began to speak as though she had indeed up to this point been talking nonsense.
 "I really can't quite decide," she said.
"Why do you think it can have been?
In a way, I think it was a kind of pride that did it.
I had two, and then Gabriel was an accident, and somehow the thought that he was an accident was so insulting to me that I had to have some more, to prove that he wasn't.
Everyone thinks Annunciata was an accident, being so much younger  than Clelia, but she wasn't, I had to work terribly hard to get Annunciata.
So I must have wanted them, you see.
For some reason.
Or another."
 "You like to tell people," said Clelia,"that you've had five children.
Because you like to see them gasp in amazement.
And then start to flatter you about how thin you are, and how productive you are, and all that.
Don't you?"
 "I suppose I must," said Mrs Denham.
"But it doesn't seem a very good reason, does it?
I mean, it sounds more like a justification than a reason.
And then, you see, it's always such a wonderful excuse.
For not having done other things."
 "How vain you are," said Martin.
 "But it's true," said Mrs Denham,"that I really do like to have James.
Otherwise I would surely have sent you packing, wouldn't I?
It must be because I need him.
It's nice to have a baby in the house again.
Clelia, would you mind making his bottle?"
 "Martin, you go and make his bottle," said Clelia.
 "Must I really?" said Martin.
 "Yes, you must," said Clelia.
 "Oh, all right," said Martin, and got up and went.
 "He gets worse and worse," said Clelia, when he had gone.
 "Why on earth don't you back me up when I try to get rid of him, mother?" 
 "It seems so crude, somehow," said Mrs Denham.
 "Just getting rid of him." 
 "You might at least ask him to go and make his own baby's bottle," said Clelia.
"It's all very well, but I'm sure he doesn't boil the milk.
I'm sure he just heats it, I'm sure he doesn't actually boil it.
I only ask you to do it because I know you'll do it properly."
 "What happened to his wife?" said Clara, not for the sake of asking, but because she really wanted to know.
Clelia and her mother looked at each other blankly, and "We don't know," they said, "we never like to ask." 
When Martin returned with the bottle, Mrs Denham picked the baby out of his chair, and settled back with him in her arms.
 "Do let me give it him," she said.
"Do let me, I like to hear him suck.
Go and show Clara the garden."
And they went.
They went through the French window at the end of the room, and down the stone steps into the garden.
When they got there, Clelia said to Martin,"You really do get on her nerves, you know.
She's not joking."
 "I know I get on her nerves," said Martin.
"But she likes things on her nerves.
 "Not things like you," said Clelia.
 "Anyway, she likes James," said Martin.
"Of course she likes James, I mean to say, there's nothing to dislike in James, is there?
She likes all babies, you ran see her outside the fishmongers peering into other people's prams.
But that's no reason for taking advantage of her weak points."
 "She's not a child herself," said Martin.
 "And when she says she wants a baby in the house, I do her the credit of believing her." 
 "Well, that's very hypocritical of you," said Clelia,"because you know quite well that she only wants to have James so as not to hurt your feelings.
She's getting old now, she's fifty next year, she doesn't want to run around making bottles and changing nappies.
And she's got quite enough grandchildren without having to borrow other people's spare babies."
 "Why should she care about my feelings?" said Martin.
"Goodness me, don't start taking that as a compliment, she cares about everyone's feelings, she's an archetypal victim, she's an absolute fool about other people's feelings, and let me warn you, I may as well warn you, the more she dislikes somebody, the more somebody annoys her, the more careful she is not to hurt their feelings, in fact the only people she is ever rude to are people like me and Gabriel and Papa, I mean people she cares for enough not to worry about being fair to.
My goodness, Clara, how frightfully boring for you, how can you bear to listen to us.
Let's go to the end of the garden and look at the ghastly thing that Martin flogged us."
 "It isn't boring at all," said Clara, truthfully.
 "I find it quite enlightening." 
 "Enlightening, enlightening," said Clelia,"I don't at all like the sound of that word.
I don't want you to find things out about me, I don't want you to stop liking me."
 "Enlightenment," said Martin, reaching for Clelia's arm,"can only endear you.
The more one sees of you, the more…’
 "Oh, lay off," said Clelia, and pulled away from him, and skipped a few steps on the green short grass, and then did rather a professional cartwheel.
 "Can you do cartwheels, Clara?" 
 "I can," said Clara, "but I won't because my pants would show." 
And she followed Clelia, more decorously, to the end of the garden.
At the end of the lawn there was a sundial; they looked at it and it had got the time right.
 "I'm always amazed," said Clelia, "to find the sun is so reliable." 
Behind the sundial there were a few trees, some of them in flower: a small path led into their deceptive shallow depths, and there, in a hollow a few yards from a high brick wall that bordered the garden, stood a sculpture.
The trees grew closely round it, and willow-like fronds drooped upon it; it was made partly of bronze, and the bronze bad taken on the colour of green bark.
 "We tried to hide it," said Clelia, and laughed.
"We shoved it down here because we wanted to hide it.
It's quite horrible, really.
But you can't see it properly here.
You can't see how bad it really is."
 "I wouldn't know," said Clara,"whether it were bad or not.
But it looks quite pretty with all the leaves."
And she stared at it, glad to have been told that it was not good, for she could make nothing of it: it stood about five feet high, on a stone lump, and it had holes in it and stretching arms.
 "Look inside," said Clelia.
 "Look inside, through the holes." 
And Clara went and put her eye to the hole, and inside the block swam sadly a drowned lady, some seaweed, and an orange.
 "How strange," said Clara, stepping back from it.
"I think I rather like it.
How do they make it look so huge inside?
Who made it?"
 "It's all done by mirrors," said Martin, and Clelia said,"it was made by an awful Frenchman that Martin discovered, wasn't it, darling?
Though I will say this for you, my love and here she put her arm most affectionately round his waist, "in the  years I've known you, he's been your only real disaster." 
And, turning to Clara,"His taste is most remarkable, you know.
Really remarkable."
 "He was such a charming fellow," said Martin.
 "And I thought some people might like them." 
 "But nobody liked them," said Clelia.
 "Nobody at all." 
 "Whyever did you buy it then?" said Clara.
 "My mother bought it," said Clelia.
"He got round my mother.
She wanted something for the garden.
So he told her how marvellous it was, and how misunderstood this wretched Frenchman was, and she bought it.
It was thoroughly unscrupulous."
 "No it wasn't," said Martin.
 "She knew quite well it wasn't worth what she paid for it." 
 "That doesn't make any difference," said Clelia.
"Just because she does it with her eyes open.
That doesn't make it any better.
It was lucky we had enough trees to hide it in."
 "It isn't as bad as all that," said Martin.
"It's nothing to be ashamed of…
It's better than that junk she's got on the lower level.
And I know what she paid for that too."
 "The trouble with you," said Clelia,"is that you don't appreciate the distinction between the decorative and the creative arts.
It may be junk, but it looks all right in a garden.
You don't understand.
Look what a frightful sight your flat used to be.
All those white walls and contemporary curtains.
And I mean to say, who would want to live in your gallery?"
 "I always thought that gardens," said Clara, as they progressed slowly back along the long stretch of grass, and down the steps to the lower level,"I always thought that gardens were for growing flowers in.
But you don't seem to have much in the way of flowers here."
 "We don't go in for flowers," said Clelia, displaying with a sweep of her arm the lower level, curiously cluttered with urns, a bench, a dislocated piece of mosaic resting on its end, and a functionless fountain.
"We don't understand flowers, we can never remember their names.
And we're too lazy to do any gardening.
You don't have to bother with all this stuff, you just leave it, to grow weeds.
It doesn't need any attention."
 "I see," said Clara, descending: and she thought of the square flat patch that extended beyond her mother's house at home, and of the grudgingly mown grass, and the dutifully weeded herbaceous borders, and the complaints about neighbouring cats and dogs that would come and dig in the unrewarding earth.
Her family did not much understand gardening either, and took little pleasure in the fruit of their unskilled, social labours; as far back as she could remember, Clara could recollect her mother's perpetual nagging at her father to cut the lawn, her father's occasional outburst of resentment against the boys who trampled on the borders.
It never looked very impressive, at the best of times, though in spring the daffodils would lend it a brief colour: all the plants were dirty, with the insidious industrial grime, and the evergreens were particularly filthy.
She remembered the leaves of the laurel, a thick, tough, leathery spotted green and yellow: she was obliged, through ignorant association, and through a learning far wider than her experience, to picture poets and emperors crowned with such grim suburban foliage.
The garden's sole glory was a laburnum, which blossomed wonderfully each year: but even that she associated more with its dry black fatal pods than with its flowers, so often and so rigorously had she been warned of its poison.
When her father died, her mother continued to look after the garden, though Alan would come home at weekends.
even after his marriage, to mow the lawn; it gave her so little enjoyment that Clara wondered why she did not let it go to seed.
There was a widower, two doors away, whose garden had done just that: he never touched it, and grass grew feet thick all over it, and weeds flourished, and roses climbed the hedge, unpruned, and ramped across the soil.
Mrs Maugham would often abuse this garden and the widower's laziness, with a self-righteous, alarming complacency, saying that it was a scandal and a disgrace, and that it ought not to be allowed: and when one day Clara, exasperated, as she sometimes rashly was, out of her usual silence, asked her what harm it was doing anybody, Mrs Maugham had snapped triumphantly that it was harming everybody in the street, because it helped the weeds to spread.
 "You can see them," she said bitterly,"all those dandelions and thistles, and all that bindweed growing under the fence.
It's a blot on the whole neighbourhood, that's what it is."
And Clara, abashed, had retreated into silence, because she could see that it was true.
One could not rot peacefully and harmlessly, in such a neighbourhood: the airy seeds of debility would Boat too easily over the garden walls.
The Denhams' garden seemed to have no walls, so thoroughly were its boundaries screened and disguised.
Clara liked it as she had liked everything that afternoon, but even as she stood there and admired, and heard the history of the lump of mosaic, and listened to Martin's views on Candida's view on the social connotations of goldfish, she began to feel a sense of overwhelming fatigue.
Her head ached: she could encompass no more, She felt as she felt at the end of some long and erudite lecture in a foreign tongue; her mind would no longer pay attention.
Whole concepts, whole reorganizations of thought swam drunkenly through her head, and lurched and revolved like the drowned woman and her orange: she no longer knew what gardens and houses were for, and their distinctions, once clear, had grown confused.
She followed Martin and Clelia into the house, and drank, eventually, a large gin and tonic, and then she went home on the bus, and when she got home she was suddenly and violently sick.
She could not assimilate, however hard she willed to do so, such strange food: and she woke in the morning hungry, but with her head still aching.