

Carolyn Steedman
Landscape for a Good Woman
When I was three, before my sister was born, I had a dream.
It remains quite clear across the years, the topography absolutely plain, so precise in details of dress that I can use them to place the dream in historical time.
We were in a street, the street so wide and the houses so distant across the other side that it might not have been a street at all; and the houses lay low with gaps between them, so that the sky filled a large part of the picture.
Here, at the front, on this side of the wide road, a woman hurried along, having crossed from the houses behind.
The perspective of the dream must have shifted several times, for I saw her once as if from above, moving through a kind of square, or crossing place, and then again from the fixed point of the dream where I stood watching her, left forefront.
She wore the New Look, a coat of beige gaberdine which fell in two swaying, graceful pleats from her waist at the back (the swaying must have come from very high heels, but I didn't notice her shoes), a hat tipped forward from hair swept up.
She hurried, something jerky about her movements, a  tittupping , agitated walk, glancing round at me as she moved across the foreground.
Several times she turned and came some way back towards me, admonishing, shaking her finger.
Encouraging me to follow in this way perhaps, but moving too fast for me to believe that she wanted me to do that, she entered a revolving door of dark polished wood, mahogany and glass, and started to go round and round, looking out at me as she turned.
I wish I knew what she was doing, and what she wanted me to do.
This book is about childhood, a time when only the surroundings show, and nothing is explained.
It is also about a period of recent history, the 1950s, and about the way in which those years shaped individual lives and collective ideas.
But children do not possess a social analysis of what is happening to them, or around them, so the landscape and the pictures it presents have to remain a background, taking on meaning later, from different circumstances.
Understanding of the dream built up in layers, over a long period of time.
Its strange, lowered vista, for instance(which now reminds the adult more than anything else of George Herriman's Krazy Kat, where buildings disappear and reappear from frame to frame") is an obvious representation of London in the late forties and fifties: all the houses had gaps in between , because of the bombs, and the sky came closer to the ground than seemed right.
I understood what I had seen in the dream when I learned the words "gaberdine" and "mahogany" ; and I was born in the year of the New Look, understood by 1951 and the birth of my sister, that dresses needing twenty yards for a skirt were items as expensive as children — more expensive really, because after 1948 babies came relatively cheap, on tides of free milk and orange juice, but good cloth in any quantity was hard to find for a very long time.
Detail like this provides retrospective labelling, but it is not evidence about a historical period.
The only evidence from that dream is the feeling of childhood — all childhoods, probably: the puzzlement of the child watching from the pavement, wondering what's going on, what they, the adults are up to, what they want from you, and what they expect you to do.
Worked upon and reinterpreted, the landscape becomes an historical landscape, but only through continual and active reworking.
 "The essence of the historical process," says Tamara Hareven in Family Time and Industrial Time, is the meeting between an individual's or a group's life history and the historical moment.
By the time my father could sit down with me in a pub, slightly drunk, tell me and my friends about Real Life, crack a joke about a Pakistani that silenced a whole table once, and talk about the farm labourer's — his grandfather's — journey up from Eye in Suffolk working on the building of the Great North Western Railway to Rawtenstall on the Lancashire-Yorkshire border, I was doing history at Sussex, and knew more than he did about the date and timing of journeys like that.
My father, old but gritty, glamorous in the eyes of the class of '68, a South London wide boy with an authentic background, described his grandfather's funeral, about 1912, when a whole other family, wife, children, grandchildren, turned up out of the blue from somewhere further down the line where they'd been established on the navvy's journey north.
(This was a circumstance paralleled at his own funeral, when the friends and relations of the woman he'd been living with for part of the week since the early 1960s stole the show from us, the pathetic huddle of the family of his middle years.)
My mother's story on the other hand was told to me much earlier, in bits and pieces throughout the fifties, and it wasn't delivered to entertain but rather to teach me lessons.
There was a child, an eleven-year-old from a farm seven miles south of Coventry, sent off to be a maid-of-all-work in a parsonage in Burnley.
She had her tin trunk, and she cried, waiting on the platform with her family seeing her off, for the through train to Manchester.
They'd sent her fare, the people in Burnley;"but think how she felt, such a little girl, she was only eleven, with nothing but her little tin box.
Oh she did cry."
I cry now over accounts of childhood like this, weeping furtively over the reports of nineteenth century commissions of inquiry into child labour, abandoning myself to the luxuriance of grief in libraries, tears staining the pages where Mayhew's little watercress girl tells her story.
The lesson was, of course, that I must never, ever cry for myself for I was a lucky little girl; my tears should be for all the strong, brave women who gave me life.
This story, which embodied fierce resentment against the unfairness of things, was carried through seventy years and three generations, and all of them, all the good women, dissolved into the figure of my mother who was, as she told us, a good mother.
She didn't go out drinking or  dancing; she didn't do as one mother she'd known (in a story of maternal neglect that I remember feeling was over the top at the time) and tie a piece of string round my big toe, dangle it through the window and down the front of the house, so that the drunken mother, returning from her carousing, could tug at it, wake the child, get the front door opened and send it down the shop for a basin of pie and peas.
I still put myself to sleep by thinking about not lying on a cold pavement covered with newspapers.
She must have told me once that I was lucky to have a warm bed to lie in at night.
What she did, in fact, the eleven-year-old who cried on Coventry station, was hate being a servant.
She got out as soon as she could, and found work in the weaving sheds — "she was a good weaver; six looms under her by the time she was sixteen" — marry, produce nine children, eight of whom emigrated to the cotton mills of Massachusetts before the First World War, managed, "never went before the Guardians" .1 It was much, much later that I learned from One Hand Tied Behind Us that four was the usual number of looms  for a Lancashire weaver; Burnley weavers were not well organised, and my great-grandmother had six not because she was a good weaver but because she was exploited."
In 1916, when her daughter Carrie's husband was killed at the Somme, she managed that too, looking after the three-year old my mother, so that Carrie could go on working at the mill.
But long before the narrative fell into place, before I could dress the eleven-year-old of my imagination in the clothing of the 1870s, I knew perfectly well what that child had done, and how she had felt.
She cried, because tears are cheap; and then she'd stopped, and got by, because nobody gives you anything in this world.
What was given to her, passed on to all of us, was a powerful and terrible endurance, the self-destructive defiance of those doing the best they can with what life hands out to them.
From a cotton town, my mother had a heightened awareness of fabric and weave, and I can date events by the clothes I wore as a child, and the material they were made of.
Post-war children had few clothes, because of rationing; but not only scarcity, rather names like barathea, worsted, gaberdine, twill, jersey…fix them in my mind.
The dream of the New Look has to have taken place during or after the summer of 1950, because in it I wore one of my two summer dresses, one of green and one of blue gingham, that were made that year and that lasted me, with letting down, until I went to school.
Sometime during 1950, I think before the summer, before the dresses were made, I was taken north to Burnley and into the sheds.
My mother was visiting someone who worked there whom she'd known as a child.
The woman smiled and nodded at me through the noise that made a surrounding silence.
Later, my mother told me they had to lip read: they couldn't hear each other speak for the noise of the looms.
But I didn't notice the noise.
She wore high platform-soled black shoes that I still believe I heard click on the bright polished floor as she walked between her looms.
When I hear the word "tending" I think always of that confident attentiveness to the needs of the machines, the control over work that was unceasing, with half a mind and hands engaged but the looms always demanding attention.
When I worked as a primary school teacher I sometimes retrieved that feeling with a particular clarity, walking between the tables on the hard floor, all the little looms working but needing my constant adjustment.
The woman wore a dress that seemed very short when I recalled the picture through the next few years: broad shoulders, a straight skirt that hung the way it did — I know now — because it had some rayon in it.
No New Look here in Burnley either.
The post-war years were full of women longing for a full skirt and unable to make it.
I wanted to walk like that, a short skirt, high heels, bright red lipstick, in charge of all that machinery.
It's extremely difficult for me to think of women as people who do not work; their work, moreover, is visible and comprehensible; they can explain, or show to children what they do and how — unlike men, whose process of getting money is mysterious and hidden from view.
There's been recent reassessment of the traditional picture of the enforced flight from the labour force to domesticity on the part of women just after the war, and far from a flight, large-scale recruitment to the new industries in the early 1950s now seems to present a more historically accurate picture.
It's probable that the memory of most children of our generation is of women as workers.
I had no awareness of the supposed stereotypical mother of that era — lipsticked and aproned, waiting at the door — and don't think I even encountered a picture of her, in books, comics or film, until the early 1960s.
As a teenage worker my mother had broken a recently established pattern.
When she left school in 1927 she hadn't gone into the sheds.
She lied to me, though, when I asked at about the age of eight what she'd done: she said she'd worked in an office, done clerical work.
Ten years later, on a visit to Burnley and practising the skills of the oral historian, I talked to my grandmother, and she, puzzled, told me that Edna had never worked in any office, had in fact been apprenticed to a dry cleaning firm that did tailoring and mending.
On the same visit, the first since my early childhood, I found a reference written by a local doctor for my mother, who about 1930 applied for a job as a ward maid at the local asylum, confirming that she was clean, strong, honest and intelligent.
I wept over that of course, for a world where some people might doubt her — my — cleanliness.
I didn't care much about the honesty, and I knew I was  strong; but there are people everywhere waiting for you to slip up, to show signs of dirtiness and stupidity, so that they can send you back where you belong.
She didn't finish her apprenticeship — I deduce that, rather than know it — sometime, it must have been in 1934, came south, worked in Woolworths on the Edgware Road, spent the war years in Roehampton, a ward maid again, at the hospital where they mended fighter pilots' ruined faces.
Now I can feel the deliberate vagueness in her accounts of those years: "Where did you meet Daddy?" 
 "Oh, at a dance, at home." 
There were no photographs.
Who came to London first?
I wish now I'd asked that question.
He worked on the buses when he arrived, showed me a canopy in front of a hotel that he'd brought down on his first solo drive.
He was too old to be called up (a lost generation of men who were too young for the first war, too old for the second).
There's a photograph of him standing in front of the cabbages that he'd grown for victory wearing his Home Guard uniform.
But what did he do?
Too late to find out.
During the post-war housing shortage my father got an office job with a property company, and the flat that went with it.
I was horn in March 1947, at the peak of the Bulge: more babies horn that month than ever before or after, and carried through the terrible winter of 1946–47.
We moved to Streatham Hill in June 1951, to an estate owned by the same company, later to be taken over by Lambeth Council.
A few years later, my father got what he wanted, which was to be in charge of the company's boiler maintenance.
On his death certificate it says "heating engineer" .
In the 1950s my mother took in lodgers.
Streatham Hill Theatre (now a bingo hall) was on the pre-West End circuit, and we had chorus girls staying with us for weeks at a time.
I was woken up in the night sometimes, the spare bed in my room being made up for someone they'd met down the Club, the other lodger's room already occupied.
I like the idea of being the daughter of a theatrical landlady, but this enterprise provides my most startling and problematic memories.
Did the girl from Aberdeen really say, "Och, no, not on the table!" as my father flattened a bluebottle with his hand, and did he really put down a newspaper on the same table  to eat his breakfast?
I feel a fraud, a bit-part player in a soft and southern version of The Road To Wigan Pier.
I remember incidents like these, I think, because I was about seven, the age at which children start to notice social detail and social distinction, but also more particularly because the long lesson in hatred for my father had begun, and the early stages were in the traditional mode, to be found in the opening chapters of Sons and Lovers and Lawrence's description of the inculcated dislike of Mr Morrell, of female loathing for coarse male habits.
The newspaper on the table is problematic for me because it was problematic for my mother, a symbol of all she'd hoped to escape and all she'd landed herself in.
(It was at this time, I think, that she told me that her own mother, means-tested in the late twenties, had won the sympathy of the relieving officer, who ignored the presence of the saleable piano because she kept a clean house, with a cloth on the table.)
Now, thirty years later, I feel a great regret for the father of my first four years, who took me out, and who probably loved me, irresponsibly ( "it's all right for him; he doesn't have to look after you" ), and I wish I could tell him now, even though he was, in my sister's words, a sod, that I'm sorry for my years of rejection and dislike.
But we had to choose, early on, which side we belonged to, and children have to come down on the side that brings the food home and gets it on the table.
By 1955 I was beginning to hate him — because he was to blame, for the lack of money, for my mother's terrible dissatisfaction at the way things were working out.
The new consumer goods came into the household slowly — because of him.
We had the first fridge in our section of the street (he got it cheap — contacts) but were late to get a television.
The vacuum cleaner was welcomed at first because it meant no longer having to do the stairs with a stiff brush.
But in fact it added to my Saturday work because I was expected to clean more with the new machine.
I enjoy shocking people by describing how goods were introduced into households under the guise of gifts for children: the fridge in the house of the children we played with over the road was given to the youngest as a birthday present — the last thing an eight-year old wants.
My mother laughed at this, scornfully; but in fact she gave us Christmas and birthday presents of clothes and  shoes, and the record player came into the house in this way, as my eleventh birthday present.
But I wasn't allowed to take it with me when I left; it wasn't really mine at all.
I remember walking up the hill from school with my mother after an open day, and asking her what class we were; or rather, I asked her if we were middle class, and she was evasive.
She was smiling a pleased smile, and working things out; I think it must have been the afternoon (the only time she visited my primary school) she was told that I'd be going into the eleven-plus class and so (because everyone in the class passed the exam) would be going to grammar school.
I was working out well, an investment with the promise of paying out.
I answered my own question, and said that I thought we must be middle class, and reflected very precisely in that moment on my mother's black waisted coat with the astrakhan collar, and her high-heeled black suede shoes, her lipstick.
She looked so much better than the fat, spreading South London mothers around us, that I thought we had to be middle class.
The coat and the lipstick came from her own work.
"If you want something, you have to go out and work for it.
Nobody gives you anything; nothing comes free in this world."
About 1956 or 1957 she got an evening job in one of the espresso bars opening along the High Road, making sandwiches and frying eggs.
She saved up enough money to take a manicuring course and in 1958 got her diploma, thus achieving a certified skill for the first time in her forty-five years.
When I registered her death I was surprised to find myself giving this as her trade, because learned history implies that only the traditional ones — tailoring, weaving, joining, welding — are real.
She always worked in good places, in the West End; the hands she did were in Vogue once.
She came home with stories and imitations of her "ladies" .
When I was about twelve she told me how she'd "flung" a sixpenny piece back at a titled woman who'd given it her as a tip: "If you can't afford any more than that Madam, I suggest you keep it." 
Wonderful!— like tearing up the ration books.
From her job, supported by the magazines she brought home, and her older skill of tailoring and dressmaking, we learned how the goods of the earth might be appropriated, with a certain voice, the cut and fall of a skirt, a good winter coat; with leather shoes too, but  above all by clothes, the best boundary between you and a cold world.
We weren't, I now realise by doing the sums, badly off My father paid the rent, all the bills, gave us our pocket money, and a fixed sum of f7 a week housekeeping money quite a lot in the late 1950s — went on being handed over every Friday until his death, even when estrangement was obvious, and he was living most of the time with someone else.
My mother must have made quite big money in tips, for the records of her savings, no longer a secret, show quite fabulous sums being stored away in the early sixties.
Poverty hovered as a belief.
It existed in stories of the thirties, in a family history.
Even now when a bank statement comes that shows I'm overdrawn, or the gas bill for the central heating seems enormous, my mind turns to quite inappropriate strategies, like boiling down the ends of soap, and lighting fires with candle ends and spills of screwed-up newspaper to save buying wood.
I think about these things because they were domestic economies that we practised in the 1950s.
We believed we were poor because we children were expensive items, and all the arrangements had been made for us.
 "If it wasn't for you two," my mother told us, "I could be off somewhere else." 
After going out manicuring she started spending Sunday afternoons in bed and we couldn't stay in the house nor play on the doorstep for fear of disturbing her.
The house was fill of her terrible tiredness, her terrible resentment; and I knew it was all my fault.
When I came across Kathleen Woodward's Jipping Street I read it with the shocked amazement of one who had never seen what she knew written down before.
Kathleen Woodward's mother of the 1890s was the one I knew: mothers were people who told you how long they were in labour with you, how much you hurt, how hard it was to have you ( "twenty hours with you," my mother frequently reminded me) and who told you to accept the impossible contradiction of being both desired and being a burden, and not to complain.
This ungiving endurance is admired by working-class boys who grow up to write about their mothers' flinty courage.
But the daughter's silence on this matter is a measure of the price you have to pay for survival.
I don't think the baggage will ever lighten, for me or my sister.
We were born, and had no choice in that matter; but we were burdens, expensive, never grateful enough.
There was nothing we could do to pay back the debt of our existence.
Never have children, dear,"she said.
 "They ruin your life." 
Later, in 1977 after my father's death, we found out that they were never married, that we were illegitimate.
In 1934 my father left his wife and two-year-old daughter in the north, and came to London.
He and my mother had been together for at least ten years when I was born, and we think now that I was her hostage to fortune, the factor that might persuade him to get a divorce and marry her.
But the ploy failed.
Just before my mother's death, playing around with the photographs on the bedroom mantelpiece, my niece discovered an old photograph underneath one of me at three.
A woman holds a tiny baby.
It's the early 1930s, a picture of the half-sister, left behind.
But I think I knew about her and her mother long before I looked them both in the face, or heard about their existence; knew that the half-understood adult conversations around me, the quarrels about "her" , the litany of "she" , "she" , "she" from behind closed doors made the figure in the New Look coat, hurrying away, wearing the clothes my mother wanted to wear, angry with me yet nervously inviting me to follow, caught finally in the revolving door.
We have proper birth certificates, because my mother must have told a simple lie to the registrar, a discovery about the verisimilitude of documents that worries me a lot as a historian.
In 1954 The Pirates of Penzance was playing at the Streatham Hill Theatre, and we had one of the baritones as a lodger instead of the usual girls.
He was different from them, didn't eat in the kitchen with us, but had my mother bake him potatoes and grate carrots that he ate in the isolation of the dining room.
He converted my mother to Food Reform, and when she made a salad of grated vegetables for Christmas dinner in 1955, my father walked out and I wish he'd taken us with him.
I've talked to other people whose mothers came to naturopathy in the fifties, and it's been explained as a way of eating posh for those  who don't know about Continental food.
I think it did have a lot to do with the status that being different conferred, for in spite of the austerity of our childhood, we believed that we were better than other people, the food we ate being a mark of this, because our mother told us so — so successfully that even now I have to work hard at actually seeing the deprivations.
But more than difference, our diet was to do with the desperate need, wrenched from restricted circumstances, to be in charge of the body.
Food Reform promised an end to sickness if certain procedures were followed, a promise that was not, of course, fulfilled.
I spent a childhood afraid to fall ill, because being ill meant my mother had to stay off work, and lose money.
But more than this, I think a precise though unconscious costing of our childhood lay behind our eating habits.
Brussels sprouts, baked potatoes, grated cheese, the variation of vegetables in the summer, a tin of vegetarian steak pudding on Sundays and a piece of fruit afterwards is a monotonous but healthy diet, and I can't think of many cheaper ways to feed two children and feel you're doing your best for them at the same time.
My mother brought the food home at night, buying it each day when she got off the bus from work.
My sister's job was to meet her at the bus stop with the wheel basket so she didn't have to carry it up the road.
We ate a day's supply at a time, so there was never anything much in the house overnight except bread for breakfast and the staples that were bought on Saturday.
When I started to think about these things I was in a position to interpret this way of living and eating as a variation on the spending patterns of poverty described in Booth's and Rowntree's surveys; but now I think it was the cheapness of it that propelled the practice.
We were a finely balanced investment, threatening constantly to topple over into the realms of demand and expenditure.
I don't think, though, that until we left home, we ever cost more to feed and clothe than that £7 handed over each week.
Now I see the pattern of our nourishment laid down like our usefulness, by an old set of rules.
At six I was old enough to go on errands, at seven to go further to pay the rent and rates, make the long, dreary trip to the Cap for the divi.
By eight I was old enough to clean the house and do the weekend shopping.
At eleven  it was understood that I washed the breakfast things and scrubbed the kitchen floor before I started my homework.
At fifteen, when I could legally go out to work, I got a Saturday job which paid for my clothes (except my school uniform, which was part of the deal, somehow).
I think that until I drop I will clean wherever I happen to be on Saturday morning.
I take a furtive and secret pride in the fact that I can do all these things, that I am physically strong, can lift and carry things that defeat other women, wonder with some scorn what it must be like to have to learn to clean a house when adult, not have the ability laid down as part of the growing self.
Like going to sleep by contrasting a bed with a pavement, I sometimes find myself thinking that if the worst comes to the worst I can always earn a living by my hands; I can scrub, clean, cook and sew; all you have in the end is your labour.
I was a better investment than my sister, because I passed the eleven-plus, went to grammar school, would get a good job (university was later seen to offer the same arena of advantages), marry a man who would, as she said, buy"me a house, and you a house.
There's no virtue in poverty."
The dreary curtailment of our childhood was, we discovered after my mother's death, the result of the most fantastic saving — for a house, a dream house that was never bought.
When I was about seventeen I learned that V.S. Naipaul wrote A House for Mr Biswas in Streatham Hill."
I think of the poetic neatness of the novel about the compulsive, enduring desire for a house of one's own being composed only a few streets away from where someone with infinitely fewer resources tried to mobilise the same dream.
It was at least an important dream, a literary dream, that dictated the pattern of our days.
It seems now a joyless childhood.
My sister reminds me of our isolation, the neighbours who fed us meat and sweets, the tea parties we went out to but which we were never allowed to return.
I remember the awful depression of Sunday afternoons, my mother with a migraine in the front bedroom, the house an absolute stillness.
But I don't remember the oddness; it's a reconstruction.
What I recall is what I read, and my playing Annie Oakley by myself all summer afternoon at the recreation ground, running up and down the hill in my brown gingham dress, wearing a cowboy  hat and carrying a rifle.
Saturday morning pictures provided confirming images of women who not only worked hard, earned a living, but who carried a gun into the bargain.
The essence of being a good child is taking on the perspective of those who are more powerful than you, and I was good in this way as my sister never was.
A house up the road, Sunday afternoon about 1958, plates of roast lamb offered.
My sister ate, but I refused, not out of sacrifice nor because I was resisting temptation (I firmly believed that meat would make me ill, as my mother said), but because I knew — though this formulation is the adult's rather than the ten-year old's — that the price of the meal was condemnation of my mother's oddness, and I wasn't having that.
If people give you things, they should give freely, extracting nothing in return.
I was a very upright child.
At eight I had my first migraine (I could not please her, I might as well join her; they stopped soon after I left home), and I started to get rapidly and relentlessly short-sighted.
I literally stopped seeing for a very long time.
School taught me how to read early, and I found out for myself how to do it fast.
I read all the time, rapidly and voraciously.
You couldn't join the library until you were seven, and before that I read my Hans Christian Anderson back to front when I'd read it twenty times from start to finish.
Kay was the name that I was called at home, my middle name, one of my father's names, and I knew that Kay, the boy in The Snow Queen, was me, who had a lump of ice in her heart.
I knew that one day I might be asked to walk on the edge of knives like the little mermaid, and was afraid that I might not be able to bear the pain.
Foxe's Book of Martyrs was in the old library, a one-volume edition for nineteenth century children with coloured illustrations and the text pruned to a litany of death by flame.
My imagination was furnished with the passionate martyrdom of the Protestant north.
I see now the relentless laying down of guilt, and I feel a faint surprise that I must interpret it that way.
My sister, younger than me, with children of her own and perhaps thereby with a clearer measure of what we lacked, reminds me of a mother who never played with us, whose eruptions from irritation into violence were the most terrifying of experiences, and she is there, the figure of  nightmares, though I do find it difficult to think about in this way.
My mind turns instead to the communality of this experience, of all those post-war babies competently handled but generally left alone, down the bottom of the garden in their prams, in the fresh air and out of the way.
Expectations of childhood and ways of treating babies changed rapidly in the 1950s, and perhaps the difference in perception between me and my sister is no more than four years' difference in age, and a reflection of a change in expectation on the part of children themselves, learned from the altered practice of adults around.
Against this learned account, I have to weigh what it felt like at the time, and the message of the history that was delivered up to me in small doses: that not being hungry and having a bed to sleep in at night, we had a good childhood, were better than other people, were lucky little girls.
My mother had wanted to marry a king.
That was the best of my father's stories, told in the pub in the 1960s, of how difficult it had been to live with her in 1937, during the Abdication months.
Mrs Simpson was no prettier than her, no more clever than her, no better than her.
It wasn't fair that a king should give up his throne for her, and not for the weaver's daughter.
From a traditional Labour background, my mother rejected the politics of solidarity and communality, always voted Conservative, for the left could not embody her desire for things to be really fair, for a full skirt that took twenty yards of cloth, for a half-timbered cottage in the country, for the prince who did not come.
My childhood was the place where, for my mother, the fairy tales failed, and through the glass of that childhood I now see that failure as part of a longer and more enduring one.
The 1950s was a period when state intervention in childhood was highly visible.
The calculated, dictated fairness that the ration book represented went on into the new decade, and when we moved from Hammersmith to Streatham Hill in 1951 there were medicine bottles of orange juice and jars of Virol to pick up from the baby clinic for my sister.
This overt intervention in our lives was experienced by me as entirely  beneficent , so I find it difficult to match an analysis of the welfare policies of the late forties which  calls "the post-war Labour government…the last and most glorious flowering of late Victorian liberal philanthropy" , 6 which I know to be correct, with the sense of self that those policies imparted.
If it had been only philanthropy, would it have felt like it did?
I think I would be a very different person now if orange juice and milk and dinners at school hadn't told me, in a covert way, that I had a right to exist, was worth something.
My inheritance from those years is the belief maintained with some difficulty, that I do have a right to the earth.
I think that had I grown up with my parents only twenty years before, I would not now believe this.
For I was also an episode in someone else's narrative, not my own person, my mother's child, and brought into being for a particular purpose.
Being a child when the state was publicly engaged in making children healthy and literate was a support against my particular circumstances, its central benefit being that, unlike my mother, the state asked for nothing in return.
Psychic structures are shaped by these huge historical labels: "charity" , "philanthropy" , "state intervention" .
It was a considerable achievement for a society to pour so much milk, so much orange juice, so many vitamins down the throats of its children, for the height and weight of those children to outstrip so fast the measurements of only a decade before.
But the 1950s divided people from each other; large-scale benevolence maintained individualism, and reveals its basis in the philanthropy described above.
The statistics of healthy and intelligent childhood were stretched out along the curve of achievement, and only some were allowed to travel through the narrow gate at eleven, towards the golden city.
This particular political failure of the post-war welfare policies, to provide equality and not just the opportunity for individual achievement, was set in its turn against the dislocation that my mother's 1950s represent: welfarism in one country did not embody the desire people felt for the world that had shaped them.
From a current vantage point I see my childhood as evidence that can be used.
I think it's particularly useful as a way of gaining entry to ideas about childhood — what children are for, why to have them — that aren't written about in the official records, that is, in the  textbooks of child analysis and child psychology, and in sociological descriptions of childhood.
This public assertion of my childhood's usefulness stands side by side with the painful personal knowledge, I think the knowledge of all of us, going as far back as the story lets us, that it would have been better if it hadn't happened that way, hadn't happened at all.
People said at the time that the war had been fought for the children, for a better future, and the 1950s represent a watershed in the historical process by which children have come to be thought of as repositories of hope, and objects of desire.
Accounts like Jeremy Seabrook's in Working Class Childhood see in the material affection displayed towards children of our and more recent generations, the roots of a political failure on the part of the Labour movement to confront the inculcated desires of the market place.
 "Instead of the children of the working class being subjected to rigorous self-denial in preparation for a life-time in mill or mine," he writes, "they have been offered instead the promise of the easy and immediate gratification which, in the end, can sabotage human development and achievement just as effectively as the poverty and hunger of the past." 
9 There hovers in Working Class Childhood the ghostly presence of more decent and upright children, serving their time in the restriction of poverty and family solidarity: "the old defensive culture of poverty gave working class children…a sense of security which is denied the present generation…" 
But in this sterner, older world, the iron entered into the children's soul, and many of them had to learn that being alive ought simply to be enough, a gift that must be ultimately paid for.
Under conditions of material poverty the cost of most childhoods has been most precisely reckoned, and only life has been given freely.
(One of the least attractive features of Working Class Childhood is its denial of the evidence it presents, its interpretations of people's consciousness of grim childhoods in terms of regret and loss.)
After that initial investment, no one gave me and my sister anything.
The landscape of feeling that this measured upbringing inculcated in countless children has yet to be surveyed; we should start, perhaps, with the burden of being good, and the painful watchful attention towards the needs of others rather than oneself.
I carry with me the tattered remnants of this psychic structure: there is no way of not working hard, nothing in the end but an endurance that will allow me to absorb everything by the way of difficulty, holding on to the grave.
This psychology must have served capitalism at least as well as a desire for the things of the market.
At least Jeremy Seabrook's cut-out cardboard teenage figures of abject horror and pity know, as they sit sniffing glue and planning how to knock off a video recorder, that the world owes them something, that they have a right to the earth, an attitude at least as subversive as the endurance"that is the result of not being ever given very much.
Its a mistake, I think, to confuse the gift relationship with mindless material indulgence, for it is only by being given things that anyone ever learns that they have a place in the world.
I want to reinterpret the metaphor of the fifties, of childhood as a community's investment in the future, and find its material base in the individual circumstances that help interpret historical developments.
My sister and I were investments that didn't pay off for the income that is derived from investment is unearned income: having made that initial payment, the investor need make no further effort.
An older history brought this idea forward to a new era: we were brought up to be simply grateful for being alive, guilty at the fact of our existence.
Two weeks before my mother's death, I went to see her.
It was the first meeting in nine years — for the day of my father's funeral doesn't really count.
The letter announcing my visit lay unopened on the mat when she opened the door, and an hour later I came away believing that I admired a woman who could, under these circumstances and in some pain, treat me as if I had just stepped round the corner for a packet of tea ten minutes before, and talk to me about this and that, and nothing at all.
But I was really a ghost who came to call.
Talking to my sister on the phone about the visit she insisted that the feeling of being absent in my mother's presence was nothing to do with the illness, was the emotional underpinning of our childhood.
We were truly illegitimate, our selves not there.
Our unconscious acknowledgement of this at the time lay in taking  up as little space as possible, not being a nuisance.
Paradoxically, this denial of the known self makes its boundaries stronger.
As I went out, past the shrouded furniture in the front room (things made ready these twenty years past for the move that never came) I noticed a Lowry reproduction hanging over the mantelpiece that hadn't been there on my last visit.
Why did she go out and buy that obvious representation of a landscape she wanted to escape, the figures moving noiselessly under the shadow of the mill?
 "They know each other, recognise each other ," says John Berger of these figures.
"They are not, as is sometimes said, like lost souls in limbo; they are fellow travellers through a life which is impervious to most of their choices…
"
Perhaps she did buy that picture because it is concerned with loneliness, with "the contemplation of time passing without meaning" ,"1 and moved then, momentarily, hesitantly, towards all the other lost travellers.
Where is the place that you move into the landscape and can see yourself?
When I want to find myself in the dream of the New Look, I have to reconstruct the picture, look down at my sandals and the hem of my dress, for in the dream itself I am only an eye, watching.
Remembering the visit to the cotton mill, on the other hand, I can see myself watching from the polished floor; I am in the picture.
To see yourself in this way is a representation of the child's move into historical time, one of the places where vision establishes the child's understanding of herself as part of the world.
In its turn, this social understanding interprets the dream landscape.
When I was about nine I grew positively hungry for poetry.
I learned enormous quantities to say to myself in bed at night.
The poetry book I had was Stevenson's A Child's Garden of Verses, and I read it obsessively, once going in to Smith's in the High Road to ask if he'd written any other poems.
I liked the one on the last page best, "To Any Reader" , and its imparting of the sad, elegiac information that the child seen through the pages of the book:
…has grown up and gone away,
And it is but a child of air
That lingers in the garden there.
You're nostalgic for childhood whilst it happens to you because the dreams show you the landscape you're passing through, but you don't know yet that you want to escape.