

Out of the Storm
1935–1939
Throughout 1935 Vivien continued her lonely pursuit of her husband.
It seems to have been her settled conviction that she had only to see and to speak to him, and he would agree to return to her.
And, in November, she found him.
She had discovered that he was to deliver an address at a Sunday Times book exhibition, and she arrived there with Polly.
This was the confrontation Eliot most feared.
Vivien went up to him and said "Oh, Tom" ; he seized her hand and said "How do you do" in a loud voice.
The dog recognized him and jumped up at him, but he seemed not to notice.
When he spoke at the exhibition, Vivien stood the whole time, keeping her eyes fixed upon his face.
After he had finished his address she went up to him again and said, "Will you come back with me?" 
He replied, "I cannot talk to you now." 
She gave him three of his books: he signed them, and returned them to her.
Then he walked away.
They were never to see each other again.
In the following month, Vivien sent out Christmas cards signed "From Mr and Mrs T. S. Eliot" .
Eliot's own reactions to this meeting are not known, although it must have profoundly embarrassed and unnerved him — not least because further public encounters of that kind were always possible.
His fears were no doubt compounded by the fact that Vivien's behaviour was becoming more and more erratic.
as if to lure her husband into a false sense of security, she pretended in the following year that she had gone to America and had hired a secretary, called Daisy Miller, to answer her correspondence in her absence: but she herself was Daisy Miller.
It is perhaps interesting that she gave her forwarding address in America as 83 Brattle Street which was, in fact, where Emily Hale lived.
In the spring and summer of 1936, she went to the Mercury Theatre on at least seven occasions in order to  see Murder in the Cathedral .
And then she disappears from sight; the diary entries stopped, and the next written record is her death certificate eleven years later.
She died in Northumberland House, a private mental hospital in Finsbury Park, north London.
The records of that hospital seem to have been long since destroyed, but Vivien's brother, Maurice Haigh-Wood, has explained what happened to her: a "reception order" was drawn up for her committal.
Her personal physician, Dr Miller, seems to have instigated the move in the summer of 1938 since it was his belief that "she was in need of professional care" .
The procedure, if it followed the usual course, would have been this: two doctors would be taken to see her and would ask her a few questions.
If her answers were unsatisfactory, their report would be taken to a magistrates' court the next morning and a petition for her "reception order" drawn up and signed by two people — preferably near relatives or representatives of the family.
Maurice suggested that an attempt had already been made, after Eliot's separation from her, to have her committed but that Vivien, having been warned about, or suspecting, such a move, went to Paris — certainly she recorded on 19 June 1935 some plan to have her "arrested" but nothing happened; then, six days later, she is writing from Paris to a friend, Louise Purdon.
But on this later occasion she did not escape, and the reception order was drawn up against her.
It is not clear who signed it — her mother, Rose, was still alive but was now in her seventies.
When Maurice was asked if he had done so, he replied,"I don't think I did.
If I did, I can't remember.
Eliot himself could not legally have signed such a document since he was separated from her.
But since he was the one most involved with Vivien's welfare, he must have either approved of, or acquiesced in, her committal; he was also a trustee of the Haigh-Wood Estate, and was responsible with Maurice for Vivien's financial affairs — they must, for example, have paid her bills at Northumberland House until the time of her death.
The mystery of who signed the reception order remains: two people who were either relatives or close friends of Vivien, and who were asked to do so.
By August 1938 she had become a resident of the mental hospital, and Maurice reported to Eliot that she seemed "fairly cheerful, had slept well and eaten well, and had sat out in the garden and read a certain amount." 
But the long-term effect on Vivien must have  been profound; already a lonely woman, she was dispatched into a mental asylum by people whom she knew and trusted.
The paranoia which is evinced in the diaries of her last years at Clarence Gate Gardens is then partly justified, if she knew that such a course was being taken against her.
There are reports that she attempted to leave Northumberland House: it seems that she stayed on one occasion with Louise Purdon, who was a "night-nurse" with her own flat above a chemist's, until she was found and taken back.
But these reports cannot now be substantiated; we are left with the bare fact that she spent the rest of her life in confinement.
Even before Vivien's committal, Eliot had been much more free than in the days of his marriage; in the summer of 1935 he was with Emily Hale in Gloucestershire, and also visited the Fabers in Wales.
At a party given by John Harvard for the Herbert Reads in June, he came with fireworks and some items bought at the joke shop opposite the British Museum: sugar which when immersed let out little fish, and chocolates which he thought to be filled with sawdust but were in fact made of soap; the guests, he said, "set on me" .
In October, in a similarly light-hearted vein, he recounted to Virginia Woolf how he had been sitting in the wings of the Westminster Theatre (where Sweeney Agonistes was playing) and, on another occasion, lighting fireworks in the company of John Hayward and W. H. Auden.
Certainly the grave demeanour which made such an impression upon others — the "sad eyes" and the "deep, sad voice" — was lifted in the company of friends to reveal a playful and often funny man.
He was fond of alcohol — he was a consistent, if not a heavy, drinker.
He liked to recite from memory music-hall routines — one friend remembers him, much later in life, repeating a music-hall patter entitled "Two Black Crows" which lasted three minutes.
At the offices of Faber and Faber, also, there seems to have been a succession of jokes (firecrackers in the coal scuttle on the Fourth of July) and spoof letters.
As he wrote in his Harvard Class Report in this year, "I like very simple and humane kinds of practical joke, which reminds me that I am also, at the moment, a Church Warden" .
It was no doubt in this jocular spirit that he wrote a letter to The Times on 29 November suggesting the need of a Society for the Preservation of Ancient Cheeses.
Mock solemnity of this kind may seem rather tiresome, just as practical jokes are often not funny  to those on whom they are played (they may often appear to be lightly camouflaged forms of aggression), but such jokes were characteristic of the society in which he now moved: it is difficult to imagine him playing tricks on Pound or Lewis, for example.
In a nonsense poem addressed to Virginia Woolf he described himself as "upper-middle" , a class distinction which immediately associated him with the kind of solid and respectable Englishmen amongst whom he passed his business life and to whom he went for — to use one of the characteristic words — "convivial" social life.
John Hayward, for example, was by now a close friend: he was a bibliophile and editor of precocious talent, who in 1926, at the age of twenty-one, had published an edition of Rochester's poems.
Two years later he had started writing for the Criterion, since he wished to fashion for himself a career as a man of letters.
He suffered from muscular dystrophy, however, and the creeping paralysis of that wasting and mortal disease had, by the time Eliot grew to know him well, consigned him to a wheelchair.
In 1931, according to Helen Gardner, Eliot had written him "an unusually intimate letter on suffering" .
It was at Hayward's flat at 22 Bina Gardens (only a short walk from Eliot's lodgings in Grenville Place) that Eliot, Geoffrey Faber and Frank Morley used regularly to meet in the late Thirties.
They gave each other nicknames — Hayward was known as "Tarantula" because of his sometimes acidulous wit, Morley as "Whale" , Faber as "Coot" , and Eliot as "Elephant" (because he never forgot) or of course Possum".
It sounds sufficiently tedious in an English public school fashion, an effect compounded by a little book of mock verses, Noctes Binanianae, composed mainly in the summer and autumn of 1937; it was privately printed and announced as "Certain Voluntary and Satyrical Verses and Compliments as were lately Exchang'd between some of the Choicest Wits of the Age" .
It does not make particularly amusing reading, and at first glance it may seem odd that Eliot was willing to enter the spirit of such occasions.
But the fact is that, like most people, he reserved a special kind of behaviour or language for whomever he was with; in his correspondence with Ezra Pound in the same period, far example, he became an egregious Yankee addressing another.
Pound called him "my little marsupial" , "yew old Wombat" and so on, while Eliot replied in kind to "Ezzumpo" , "Dear Doc" , "Rabbit My Rabbit" .
What is most apparent about the correspondence — apart from Pound's tendency to lecture Eliot on whom he should publish and what cause to support is Eliot's extraordinary ability to mimic Pound's verbal mannerisms, as if he were willingly immersing himself in his personality.
He even goes so far as to fabricate his signature in a way similar to Pound's, so that it forms a kind of hieroglyph.
After a while, however, Pound's constant and insistent proselytizing began to annoy him, and he reverts to his usual more careful and elaborate prose while explaining (as so many of Pound's correspondents did) that he did not at all understand what Pound was talking about.
He also became disenchanted with the amount of the correspondence; his replies become shorter and shorter until, in September 1937, his secretary wrote, "Mr Eliot also asked me to say that he is intending to write to you as soon as he has several consecutive free hours" .
Eliot was, then, a master of disguise or protective camouflage — an "upper-middle" Englishman with his publishing colleagues, a Yankee with Yankees and indeed a pillar of the Church with other such pillars.
This may help to explain the suspicion entertained by many of his friends that they were being placed in special compartments, never to mingle with those in other compartments, like cells in the honeycomb of his private life.
Ronald Duncan recalled how he met Eliot and Pound together on one of Pound's rare trips to London; when he arrived, Eliot was "singing a bawdy ballad most energetically" .
But when Duncan reminded him of this incident some years later, he "not only denied knowing the ballad but singing it…" 
In the same way, when Conrad Aiken sent him a copy of Ushant in which he described two incidents which displayed a streak of sadism"in Eliot's nature, Eliot denied any recollection of such events.
He had the curious ability to erase, or at least pretend to erase, from his memory that which did not suit his idea of himself at the time.
But if these were all roles he played, they were necessary ones; they protected a man who could be extremely shy and nervous in the company of other people.
He suffered from the kind of hypersensitivity which, unchecked or unguarded, would have incapacitated him.
On one occasion in this period he was unusually self-revealing in a conversation with Virginia Woolf; she sensed an agonized and lonely man, filled with "self-torture, doubt, conceit, desire for  warmth and intimacy" .
This was a man who needed all the help and support from others he could get.
Early in 1938 two summations of his work were published:Essays Ancient and Modern in March and, a month later,Collected Poems 1909–1935 which included the first publication of "Burnt Norton" .
He was clearing the ground, dispatching his previous writing to the putative immortality of volume form before he began seriously to concentrate on the work to come.
Essays Ancient and Modern , as its title indicates, reflects Eliot in his more pious mood; here we are entering the church of his concerns.
Half of the essays were reprinted, with slight alterations, from For Lancelot Andrewes , while the more recent of them, "Religion and Literature" , "Catholicism and International Order" and "Modern Education and the Classics" , continue the theme which he had inaugurated in After Strange Gods ; he assaults the dominant position of secularism in contemporary culture, and anticipates in lugubrious fashion the barbarism which will descend.
(The two other new essays in the collection, "The Pensées of Pascal" and "In Memoriam" are related to this mood but are more singular in conception.)
His was by now a familiar position, and the critical reactions to it had also become predictable: praise at his critical acumen in the examination of individual authors was mixed with scorn or bafflement at the general principles he espoused.
Eliot was perceptive enough about his own work to share this attitude in part; he realized, for example , that his essays on individual poets would probably be of more lasting worth than his more generalized pieces.
And in later life, he was less than satisfied with much of his prose work.
His most interesting essays during this period are, in fact, on specific poets, and are quite unencumbered by the theoretical baggage which he felt compelled to carry with him on other occasions; as a result, they show his criticism at its best — witty, cogent, perceptive.
In these occasional pieces, he is revealed as a psychological critic whose apparent ability to immerse himself in another poet's personality comes close to an act of clairvoyance.
Tennyson was a poet whose emotions were so deeply suppressed, even from himself, that they emerged as "the blackest melancholia" .
Milton was one whose sensual capacities "had been withered early by book learning" .
Byron was a "touring tragedian" whose preoccupation with his own performance made everything outside himself seem unreal, an actor "who devoted immense trouble to becoming a role that he adopted" .
In his preface to Djuna Barnes's Nightwood , he introduced a passage of autobiography couched in a similar tone: "In the Puritan morality that I remember…
Failure was due to some weakness or perversity peculiar to the individual".
Collected Poems 1909–1935 provoked a respectful response from the critics, although there was a sense in which Eliot was now being taken for granted; he had been assimilated, after something of a struggle against him by the purveyors of contemporary taste, and could quietly become a monument standing unnoticed by the roadside.
But he was aware of the stage in his career which he had reached, and work on the preparation of Collected Poems had made him feel that he was about to retire.
It would have been a public retirement, however — the first printing of the book was 6,000 copies, and it went through eleven impressions in as many years.
But in spite of the immense authority which he now possessed, his poetry had ceased to be fashionable or "chic" in the way that The Waste Land or even Ash-Wednesday had originally been: the new, or at least young, poets were no longer particularly interested in what he had to show them.
It was not a situation which worried him; as he told George Baker, the best position for any poet was to have enough financial security to view in a detached and unenvious way the temporary reputations of more fashionable writers.
But there was a sense in which his critics were right: he had become a quite different poet.
In "Inside the Whale" George Orwell described how the post-war group of writers, Pound, Joyce, Eliot and Lewis (who have since been described as the "modernists" ) were united by their pessimism: unlike men such as George Bernard Shaw and H. G. Wells, they had seen through the ideals and systems of the late nineteenth century which had come to such a smash in the early decades of the twentieth.
Orwell's point can be extended, since these writers recognized not only the dissolution of public or social values but also the bankruptcy of private ones: it ought to be remembered that the notion of "personality" reached its apogee in Oscar Wilde during the same period of scientific and social optimism.
With the collapse of private and public values — or, more specifically, the collapse of the  language which had sustained them — the "modernists" thought to construct a new order out of literature and art.
Instead of simply proclaiming "art for art's sake" they attempted to create a body of work which was on its own terms self-sufficient, with its own order and tradition, capable of embodying and communicating its own values.
All of them were in that sense authoritarians.
But it was Eliot who in the end loosened the hold of the "modernists" on English culture — not only did he assert the public role and "social usefulness" of the writer in an almost nineteenth-century manner, but he also announced that the principles he derived from his religious belief were more enduring than literary or critical ones.
He helped to create the idea of a modern movement with his own "difficult" poetry, and then assisted at its burial.
This is the essential genius of the man: his private choices and obsessions became emblematic, and in some sense determined our understanding, of the twentieth-century tradition.
These are generalities which describe a culture only now properly coming into view.
Eliot himself might not have recognized them, just as he might have considered negligible the surface of his life which is apparent to biographers.
Biography is in that sense a convenient fiction since no one can probe, without the risk of farcical failure, those hidden perceptions or experiences which run alongside the observable life but may not necessarily touch it.
On a clear spring day in May 1936 he visited Little Gidding, once the home of Nicholas Ferrar, and entered the small chapel there.
In August of the following year he travelled to East Coker, the village from which his ancestors had journeyed more than two centuries before.
Just as the events themselves can be known but not the experiences which they provoked, so we cannot hope to understand Eliot as he knelt in that chapel or in the presence of his God.
It was at such times, he said, that he was divested of all those characteristics of family, personality and reputation which identified him to the outside world.
We cannot reach into the mystery of Eliot's solitude.
And yet the mundane circumference beyond which he stepped at such times was also necessary to him: it was the circle in which he could stand and be safe.
He wrote in an essay published in 1937 that an artist must lead a "commonplace life" if he is properly to do his work.
And in the two or three years before the Second World War  that is precisely what he did.
His daily existence was taken up with a routine of duties: ecclesiastical responsibilities, the membership of various committees, the Criterion dinners, his engagements at various Tory dining clubs, and of course primarily his publishing work with its endless round of letters and meetings.
And then, in the evening, he would return to the priests of St Stephen's — first at Grenville Place and, from 1937, at Emperor's Gate across the road.
This was the shape which his life had taken.
In the course of explaining his various duties to Virginia Woolf he confessed that he seemed to be turning into an "Old Buffer" and wondered if he might not also be guilty of humbug.
Mrs Woolf explained his acquaintance with various dignitaries, however, as a way of practising society dialogue for his new play.
Certainly he gave the impression to some of being almost too respectable: "He has grown such a crust on him…" 
Henry Miller wrote.
But he was, in any case, close to becoming a smiling public man — a man who gave speeches at school prizedays, who would answer the toast to "poetry" at dinners, who collected the occasional doctorate or honorary fellowship.
In January 1936 he lectured in Dublin and when in June of the same year he agreed to read poetry at Sylvia Beach's bookshop in Paris (he was in that city for a four-day visit) she described it as an "historic event" although one member of the audience on that occasion remembered how he did not once glance at his listeners, but seemed "fiercely defensive" and turned the pages with a "look very near distaste" : his profile was "like a bird of prey of some sort" .
His reputation was such, however, that a photographer from the New York Times arrived and another member of the audience was so overwhelmed by the occasion that she described Eliot's face as "that of an archangel who has too much work to do, and so does only half of it leaving the rest to the North Wind" .
Bird of prey or archangel?
This is precisely the question which Eliot was to ask himself in his drama.
In November of the same year he talked on "The Idiom of Modern Verse" to the Cambridge English Club, where he had for one auditor the appearance of "a very shy, neurotic man" 32 In 1937 he gave an address to the Friends of Rochester Cathedral on religious drama, and lectured on Shakespeare at Edinburgh University he told Lawrence Durrell, however, that he seemed to have spoken about what he himself was interested in doing in the theatre and not  about Shakespeare at all.In April 1938 he travelled to Lisbon in order to sit on the jury for the Camoens Prize; when he came back, he had to address the Friends of Salisbury Cathedral on the poetry of George Herbert and then, two months later, talk on "The Future of Poetic Drama" at an International Theatre Congress in Stratford-upon-Avon.
These are some of the public events in an already crowded life, but there were also a myriad of smaller but no less official duties which he felt obliged to perform.
Here are his engagements for three successive days in January 1937, for example; on Thursday, 7 January, he visited a community centre in North Kensington in order to prepare a five-minute radio speech on it as a "good cause" ; on Friday, 8 January, he attended a meeting of the British Council of Churches and, on Saturday, 9 January, he went to Chelmsford in order to speak on behalf of a mystery play by Charles Williams which was being performed there.
The breaks from this routine of work were themselves predictable.
Once or twice a year he would join the Fabers during their family holidays in Wales.
Tom Faber has recalled how Eliot would characteristically dress in immaculate plus-fours; they would picnic in deserted coves, although "Uncle Tom" would often be overcome by vertigo on the perilous descent to them.
He was, in a sense, a member of the family: he would entertain spinsters to tea with Enid Faber and in the evening might read aloud from The Pickwick Papers or another suitable volume.
He also became a familiar weekend guest with friends like the Morleys, the Reads and the Richmonds, although his other duties were such that he was careful to ration the amount of time spent in this way: two weekends a month tended to be enough for him.
Nevertheless on such occasions he gave the impression to friends and acquaintances that in some ways he had mellowed.
When in November 1937 he stayed with Conrad Aiken he was "very good company" — "he played ping pong, vent to church, drank his beer like a man" .
And when a fellow American expatriate, Ethel Sands, saw him at the Richmonds' in Wiltshire, he seemed "peaceful and happy now, after his stormy life…" 
He had found one protection from those "storms" in the Anglican communion (although he indignantly denied that it was any kind of comfortable haven), and during these years his role as one of the most prominent laymen in that communion was increasing; as one  biographical note in 1937 described him, Eliot had done much "to interpret literature to the theologian and theology to the men of letters" .
Whether or not he was altogether comfortable in such a role is another matter; when Lawrence Durrell once suggested to him that he was not a Christian at all but more like a Buddhist or a primitive he replied only with a question, "Perhaps they haven't found me out yet?" 
The religion which he espoused was singularly his own, and when in February 1937 he gave a radio talk on "The Church's Message to the World" he returned to a subject which was close to the centre of his concerns: the failure of Western civilization, and in particular the signal inability of liberal democracy to sustain moral or intellectual values which might effectively confront the ideologies of fascism or communism.
Unless our own society renounced "many wrong ambitions and wrong desires" and maintained its allegiance to God, it would certainly become no better and perhaps much worse than other regimes "which are popularly execrated" .
His doubts about the nature and value of contemporary society were frequently expressed also in the Criterion; in the issue of October 1935, for example, he had talked about the plight of Papuan natives who had been corrupted by Western civilization.
If our "helping hands" were in fact the embrace of a leper, "what hope have we of saving ourselves?" 
This was the general, and rather bleak, attitude behind his specific attempts to reach a formula for what was in effect a new Christian activism.
In 1936 he had been a member of the Archbishop's committee preparing for a conference to be held at Oxford on Church, Community and State.
At that conference, in July of the following year, he read a paper on "The Ecumenical Nature of the Church and Its Responsibility Towards the World" and became a member of a special section dealing with the "economic order" .
These activities led in turn to further meetings at Lambeth Palace in January and March 1938, to consider the formation of a British section of the World Council of Churches; in September, he was at a meeting of the Council on the Christian Faith and the Common Life.
He was a natural server on such committees — it was part of that large inheritance from his busily engaged family — although his own general pessimism about the state of English society no doubt encouraged his native scepticism about the efficacy of what were essentially only institutionalized good intentions.
Perhaps an exception might be made for the one important and sustained collective activity in which he participated during these years.
As a result of the Oxford Conference of 1937, J. H. Oldham established a group of Christian intellectuals with the purpose of discussing political and social problems within a Christian context — a more ambitious version of the Chandos Group; it was known as the Moot, and among its members were Karl Mannheim, Middleton Murry, Alec Vidler as well as Eliot himself.
They first met in April 1938 at High Leigh in Hertfordshire and Eliot regularly attended further meetings until 1943.
Here he continued his intellectual dialogue with men like Mairet and Oldham, but the discussions also brought him into contact with European intellectuals such as Mannheim himself.
This was the closest he would come to that association of the best "minds" sharing certain fundamental ideals which had been a preoccupation of his since the early Twenties; and indeed it was through such encounters that he began to formulate the ideas which he was to express in The Idea of a Christian Society and Notes Towards The Definition of Culture.
But although at every opportunity he was continuing to urge a role for the Church in both social and economic matter, his attitude towards specific political events was still a tentative one; there was always a gap between his theoretical pronouncements and his actual reactions to one "crisis" or another.
This was partly the result of sheer indecision: during the Abdication imbroglio of 1936, for example, he admitted to an acquaintance that "he changed his mind on the subject several times a day" .
And when in 1937 a questionnaire was distributed to authors about their attitude towards the Spanish Civil War, he sent the reply (which he said that he never expected to be published) that, "While I am naturally sympathetic I still feel convinced that it is best that at least a few men of letters remain silent" .
This sentence has frequently been used as a stick with which to beat Eliot, generally to prove that his attitudes towards fascism were ambiguous at best.
There is a more convincing explanation, however.
He told the writer Constantine FitzGibbon some years later that he disliked the idea of poets "cashing in" on other people's misery; his scepticism about his own motives as well as those of others, and his general belief that one should not comment on any situation until one understood it thoroughly, made him refrain from making the kind of easy judgment or fashionable  "stand" in which others indulged.
It may not be an entirely satisfactory position, but it is an intelligible one.
All of the multifarious social duties in which he was now involved constantly encroached upon the time and energy which he wished to devote to his own writing.
In spite of the success of Murder in the Cathedral, and his desire to begin a new play in a modern setting, he was working on his next project rather slowly.
He started on the play which was eventually known as The Family Reunion in early 1936, having first completed "Burnt Norton" .
As we have seen, he had declined commissions to write further historical or religious dramas on the lines of Murder in the Cathedral: as far as he was concerned, that play was a "dead end" ."
He wanted to make another attempt at the kind of theatrical work with which he had experimented in Sweeney Agonistes — a verse drama but one in which the verse seems the natural expression of modern life, and which is able in a heightened or symbolic context to employ the tones and inflections of ordinary, contemporary speech.
In fact, this need to turn contemporary life into drama had been the defining characteristic of his work since "Portrait of a Lady" .
His major criticism of Murder in the Cathedral had been that it contained too much obvious "poetry" , and in the new play he wanted to create a more flexible and less ostensible verse line which could handle demotic or rarefied material equally well.
But he was making his way very cautiously.
The first drafts of the play are concerned to set the pattern of action and feeling rather than with the exploration of individual characters — this formalistic approach to his task was demonstrated in the preparation of a later drama, when he used a blackboard to set out the play and used symbols to denote his characters.
He always required an underlying form from which he could then depart, just as he tended to use a literary "model" from which he could derive a manner and a tone.
Aeschylus was the dominant inspiration behind The Family Reunion itself, although before writing it, "I read Ibsen's plays consecutively to work myself up…" 
The first scene of the play came quickly, and remained practically unaltered from draft to draft: he wrote it when the fit was on him.
But the rest was composed slowly and painfully, the verse undergoing major revisions all the time, partly on the suggestions of the various friends to whom he  sent versions of the play.
He knew what mood he wished to create in March 1937 he explained that it would be a melancholy play, and perhaps the most pessimistic thing he had ever written.
But it was a new development for him, and he was certain of nothing else.
In November 1937 he read the script aloud to Martin Browne and his wife, and their reaction was one of "fascination and doubt" : there was too much description and not enough action, they felt, and so he began once again the struggle to elucidate plot and characters.
By February 1938 he sent a complete script to Browne, but major changes were still necessary and he was seeking advice until the end of the year.
The process of revision continued at rehearsals, which began in February 1939 according to Michael Redgrave, who played the central role, Eliot kept his head buried in his text throughout them: he still seemed ill at ease with actors, although responsive to their demands.
When Redgrave suggested that an extra line was needed in order to clarify a crucial point in the action, Eliot said in a surprised voice, "Do you really need one?" 
According to Redgrave's biographer, he returned the next day with twenty-five new lines, although Martin Browne denied this.
The Family Reunion opened at the Westminster Theatre on 21 March 1939.
It was not an auspicious time for a new play to open, in any case, and the reaction of the critics was decidedly mixed — in spite, or perhaps because, of Eliot's labours the meaning of the play remained elusive and its symbolism jarred with the realism of its setting.
The play closed after five weeks.
As in much of Eliot's drama, the issue of The Family Reunion lies in the revelation of a secret: his world is one in which disclosure is the thing most needed and also most feared.
Harry, Lord Monchensey, has returned after an absence of eight years to the family home of Wishwood where his mother and other relatives are waiting for him.
But he has brought with him the Furies who appear at key moments of the action — the spectral creatures whose gaze he cannot endure but whose presence he understands, since he believes he has murdered his wife.
His sense of "filthiness" , of unreality and degradation, pervades the play.
As it turns out, his crime is an ambiguous one and, in any event, his actions are determined by a family curse: his father had wanted to kill his mother but had been dissuaded from doing so.
Harry's sense of his own especial destiny is now strengthened, and he leaves the stage as one "elected" .
The  shock of his departure, and abandonment of his family, kills his mother.
It has been suggested that Harry's guilt at apparently murdering his wife is a reflection of Eliot's own feelings after separating from Vivien.
The play was in fact being written during the period which led to her committal in Northumberland House: "You would never imagine anyone could sink so quickly" is Harry's comment on the death by drowning of his wife.
And the description of her — "A restless shivering painted shadow" — is very close to contemporary accounts of Vivien herself.
But such an identification is at best hypothetical, since it implies that Eliot was unconsciously propelled towards some instinctive revelation of his own guilt and horror.
But the fact that in this year he attended a party dressed as Dr Crippen suggests that there was a large element of conscious display and theatrical bravura in his creation of a character such as Harry.
Although such theatricality does not preclude self-examination — in some circumstances, it may actively encourage it — it does hinder the kind of self-revelation which a banal identification of author and character assumes.
In any event, Eliot explained that the character closest to himself was that of Charles, Harry's uncle, a civilized "club man" who nevertheless understands Harry's feelings.
But the game of "hunt the author" is a barren one, since there are elements of Eliot in every character: in the powerful mother, the light-brained aunts, the boringly respectable uncles.
These voices were all inside him, waiting to be freed, and the significant point is the formal pattern which he creates out of these disparate personalities.
There is no doubt that in The Family Reunion he was attempting that re-integration of religious and secular drama which he discussed at the time he was working on the play.
He had, for example, refused to allow John Gielgud to play the part of Harry because he wasn't religious enough finally to understand the motivation of the character".
But the religious theme is yoked here to the "upper-middle" stereotype of country house drama, with its retinue of cheerful cockney servants and bumbling policemen.
He had an idea of what "Shaftesbury Avenue" drama consisted, and he had an idea of what his play should suggest; but ideas are not enough.
The essential problem was that he could not visualize action or dynamic behaviour upon the stage; he understood only words and the power of rhetorical statement.
As a result, The  Family Reunion becomes a static drama of explication in which symbols of guilt and fear are the most significant elements.
The failure of the play suggested to him that he should abandon symbolism altogether in favour of realism; this was a fatal mistake, based, I believe, upon an accidental misreading of the situation.
A director other than Browne might have given more theatrical conviction to the Furies, as other more recent productions have done, and a more enthusiastic public response might then have persuaded Eliot to continue with his exploration of symbolist drama.
This is hypothetical, of course, but Sweeney Agonistes had demonstrated that it was in such drama, rather than social realism, that his theatrical talents really lay.
And, for all its deficiencies, The Family Reunion remains his most powerful play.
He knew it had been a failure with a contemporary audience, however, and he looked very sallow and melancholy a few days after its openings.
He believed it to work in scenes rather than in its entirety, and in a lecture some years later he criticized himself for not properly developing the action and for failing to adapt the classical theme to a contemporary situation.
Harry seemed to him, also, to be a "prig" .
But his depression at the failure of the play was only part of a pervasive depression from which he was now suffering.
The pact between Hitler and Chamberlain at Munich in September 1938 had confirmed Eliot's sense that the civilization of which he was a part was a worthless and immoral one: "I felt a deep personal guilt and shame for my country and for myself as part of that country," he wrote a few months later.
 "Our whole national life seemed fraudulent." 
The weeks which followed only increased his depression.
That sense of disintegration which he always feared was now all around him; earlier in 1938, he had told Martin Browne that public events made him feel that he was working against time and that, in any case, the race might be lost.
This pessimism was responsible for his decision to discontinue the publication of the Criterion in January 1939.
In the editorial which he wrote for the last issue, he discussed the general political situation which had provoked in him a depression of spirit so different from anything he had experienced in the last fifty years as "to be a new emotion" ; but he also confessed to a feeling of staleness as editor.
Three years before, he had told Bonamy Dobrée that he  was reluctant to attend Criterion dinners, and he was becoming slipshod in his editing — he printed a review, for example, which criticized John Lehmann for not including some choruses from Murder in the Cathedral in a new anthology, when he himself had forbade their inclusion.
The magazine had been consuming too much of his time even though, ideally, he ought to have been devoting more to it.
But the exercise of editing had become for him a mechanical one, and he was glad to be rid of it.
Even in its best days the circulation of the magazine had been limited to some eight hundred subscribers (most of whom were "Eliot watchers" , according to Stephen Spender) and by the time it had ceased publication that number had dropped to a couple of hundred.
In a broadcast he made after the war, he described the journal as one "which had clearly failed of its purpose several years before events brought it to an end" .
Nevertheless this lamentable epitaph should not obscure the fact that at least in part he achieved his purpose of "bringing together the best in new thinking and new writing in its time's" and that, as he confessed in an interview, editing it had been "one of the most important and rewarding" of all his activities.
Part of his motive in undertaking to edit the Criterion had been to establish his own position within metropolitan culture and, since he had been a bank employee when he had begun the paper seventeen years before, in this he had triumphantly succeeded.
But in the early years of his editorship he had also wanted to achieve something quite different from other contemporary periodicals — he was trying to express, if not create, a genuinely European consciousness which would subvert the characteristically insular nature of English cultural life.
In this attempt he was only partially successful.
Although the Criterion was the first English periodical to print the work of Cocteau, Valery and Proust, it seems always to have been Eliot's fate to espouse causes just at the point when they are about to disappear or to disintegrate.
His notion of a European intellectual and cultural order, for example, was being asserted at a time when political events began to destroy the illusion of a common European identity.
And so although his early contributors had come from the European tradition which preceded the Great War, by the early Thirties he had come to rely more and more upon British contributors.
The expression of his own opinions had also become more predictable, with an aloofness from the contemporary political  debate only matched by his constant call for spiritual and ethical principles to be introduced into that debate.
As he said in a radio broadcast in 1946, the Criterion in later years "tended to reflect a particular point of view rather than to illustrate a variety of views on that plane." 
In its literary direction, also, the Criterion had lost its momentum.
The magazine had started publication at a time when the work of Lewis, Joyce, Pound and Eliot himself was actively challenging the old standards and values of English literary culture.
But it seemed, a generation later, that even the writers whom Eliot chose to publish — like W. H. Auden, George Barker or Vernon Watkins — had reverted to a more insular if not parochial tradition.
All the ambitions and aspirations which had animated the Criterion in its first years had either been abandoned or destroyed.
His own feeling of staleness as an editor had much to do with his disenchantment at the kind of culture with which he now had to deal.
That disenchantment prompted him into one further expression of his views before the beginning of the war.
In March 1939 he gave the Boutwood Foundation lectures at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in which he outlined the kind of society which he wished to see established, a society which actively advanced the values and principles which he found so signally lacking in Neville Chamberlain's England.
As always, he did not think the lectures successful although he had tried to avoid all social engagements in February when he was working on them, he had still been distracted by rehearsals for The Family Reunion.
Nevertheless they were published later in the year under the title of The Idea of a Christian Society.
It was Eliot's belief that if Christianity disappeared our civilization would disappear with it, and in his letters to friends during this period he gave the impression that this process was already far advanced.
By the beginning of 1939, he saw only the unpleasant alternatives of uninterrupted decay or some form of authoritarian political leadership which might arrest it artificially, and exactly a year later he described the fatal weaknesses of Western democracy, and how the progress of industrialization was creating an apathetic citizenry — the kind of people who could only be aroused by despots like Hitler.
This was the prognosis which lay behind his description, in the first of the Boutwood lectures, of a contemporary "negative" rather than "pagan" society.
He goes on to explain the nature of a  specifically Christian order — a society which would construct a framework for the political acts of the state, which would realize the importance of a Christian education and in which a "Community of Christians" , an elite of both laity and clerisy, would influence the values of the ordinary citizens of the country.
He suggests the importance of community "units" like that of the parish, which have both a religious and social dimension.
But his remarks are couched in a tentative and hypothetical form.
He did not concern himself with the business of creating such a society, only with the description of what it ought to be like: the actual propositions in the book are not to be taken literally, in other words, since he was offering only the ideal model of a better civilization.
He makes some specific points, of course, and perhaps the most interesting are concerned with the need for a proper relationship with nature, in order to prevent "the exploitation of the earth" — it has, if nothing else, a prophetic ring.
But however admirable Eliot's aspirations are, his execution of them in this book is on occasions bizarre.
His characteristic method is to make a statement so large or vague as to be practically meaningless, then to qualify that statement by explaining what he does not mean by it, and finally to outline the reasons why he does not propose to discuss matters arising from it; he apologizes, at this point, for wandering off course but, instead of clarifying or refining his original proposition, he classifies the arguments of those who might object to it and proceeds to deal with their objections.
At the end his argument comes full circle.
The first statement remains intact in its vagueness and generality, but the casual reader might assume from the wealth of clauses and subordinate clauses that it has been argued and proved.
This is essentially a rhetorical technique.
He had admitted some years before that his prose was that of a controversialist rather than a "thinker" and this is what emerges in The Idea of a Christian Society.
He avoids any detailed account of his own position, and relies instead upon the denunciation of alternative arguments and a shrewd analysis of contemporary truisms.
What sustains him throughout is his recourse to certain fundamental principles of order and authority which, although they may be tangentially related to his espousal of Christianity, have their roots much further back in his own past and particularly in his early study of Bradley and Maurras.
The combination of prophetic denunciation and broad generalization did not appeal to his contemporaries; as one of his colleagues in the Chandos Group (where Eliot had been discussing the matters contained in his book) wrote later,"It is understandable that The Idea of a Christian Society should make little appeal to the large majority of the intelligentsia.
But this volume received scarcely any warmer welcome from the Church".
The point could be put differently by suggesting that in his notions of a "community of Christians" and "parochial units" he displayed little understanding of the nature of English life — his grasp of it was theoretical rather than actual; just as he adopted almost too perfectly the dress and manners of an Englishman, so he offered an idealized and therefore unconvincing account of English society.
This does not affect the cogency of his criticism and prognostication — the cultural barbarism which he feared has perhaps descended, although not in a form which he could have envisaged.
But he was so much part of his time, even in the very attempt to withdraw from it, that there was no possibility of his creating a viable alternative to the society in which he lived and worked.
He was a prophet in the wilderness, perhaps, but one whom the wilderness had entered and upon which he depended for his terrible denunciations.
After all, it was the wilderness that had helped to create him.
But even if the role of Jeremiah suited him, there were always others he could adopt.
And, in the year in which he published The Family Reunion and The Idea of a Christian Society, Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats also emerged.
A version of it had been announced by Faber and Faber, as "Mr Eliot's Book of Pollicle Dogs and Jellicle Cats as Recited to Him by the Man in White Spats" , in the spring of 1936; the blurb, written either by Frank Morley or by Eliot himself, explained that "several of the poems, illustrated by the author, have been in private circulation in the Publishers' various families for a considerable time…" 
Many of the verses on the subject of Growltiger or Macavity had in fact originally been written for the children of the Fabers and the Morleys; Eliot's own affection for small rather than large animals is sufficiently well known, and he was the owner (or patron) of a succession of cats with names like Pettipaws, Wiscus and George Pushdragon — he used the latter name when entering crossword competitions in Time and Tide.
The verses of Practical Cats revert to the "thumping" rhythms which he had assimilated as a child, and perhaps they owe something of their inspiration, also, to the memory of Eliot's father who drew cats for recreation.
They are essentially a form of nonsense verse for which Eliot had great affection and understanding; he had lectured on the subject while in America in 1933, and he once told Stravinsky that he considered Edward Lear to be a great poet and compared him with Mallarmé.
It was a kind of verse at which he himself excelled — there are those who say that it is to be found just under the surface of some of his apparently "serious" poetry — and Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats has the spirit, if not the content, of the Bolovian stanzas which he had been writing since his early twenties.
But the time and inspiration for such apparent frivolities were rapidly passing and he was soon explaining to Bonamy Dobrée that the Bolovian period had ended.
The Years of War
1939–1945
George Barker visited Eliot in his office at Faber and Faber two or three months before the declaration of war; it was late afternoon and Eliot stood by the window looking out.
 "And, after a while, in a tired voice, he said," We have so very little time "" .
This is the remark of an understandably anxious man, but one friend has observed that although he seemed as concerned as anyone about the advent of war he still retained his "detachment of spirit" .
In fact, he had no great enthusiasm for the approaching conflict: he believed, as others did, that a short war would leave the essential problems unchanged while a long one would simply provoke unrest in the civilian population.
When war was finally declared, Eliot said in an interview, "the conditions of one's life changed, and one was thrown in on oneself" .
He settled in for what seemed likely to be a long and gloomy winter: there was really nothing he could do except to carry on with his job and perhaps do some unpaid war work.
In October 1939 he caught a feverish cold; he was altogether melancholy and restless, and when at the end of the year he was asked to make a radio broadcast, he refused because he could think of nothing to say.
Many of his acquaintances were already engaged in various forms of "war effort" and he, too, wanted to feel "useful" in some way.
Indeed, the year before, he had spoken at the Moot of his hope, according to the minutes,"for occupation in some form of national service without that official status which might shut his mouth, and that he would be free to take part in any work for the future that was possible.
But such work did not seem to be forthcoming, and his sole immediate chance of usefulness was to become an air-raid warden for his area of Kensington: in this new role, he had to rehearse the procedure for marshalling people in the event of an air  raid, and to practise his fire drill by putting out bonfires in Emperor's Gate.
He was still living there with Father Cheetham, although conditions were by no means ideal for a man now in his fifties.
The pipes had frozen during the severe weather, and the inhabitants of the street had to use a standing tap for their water: as a result, Eliot used to wash and shave at his club.
His feelings of restlessness were compounded by the fact that his own work seemed to be slipping away from him.
In one letter to Virginia Woolf, he described the plight of an author anxious and dissatisfied with the work he is doing, and aware of the fact that he may never be able to write anything again.
In another, and ostensibly more jocular, letter to her he speculated about a future race which might come across the name of T. S. Eliot and wonder who he was.
These doubts about his work were directly related to his predicament in the last months of 1939.
After the failure of The Family Reunion his first instinct was to start work at once on a new play which would avoid the failures of the earlier one.
No doubt he wanted to prove to himself, as much as to anyone else, that he could do better.
But the outbreak of hostilities changed all of his plans; there would be no audience for a new play, and certainly no opportunity for it to be staged, while the conflict continued.
And so he was stuck, his momentum stalled.
But his frustration was part of the larger crisis which now confronted him, as it did everyone else.
The orderly life which he had adopted since his separation from Vivien, the routine in which he had seemed happier and more peaceful than before, had now been destroyed by external events, and everything was cast in doubt.
As a result he was, as he said, forced in upon himself.
In these uncertain and troubled circumstances he was called back to the one thing outside his faith in which he could place his trust.
Although in September 1939 he did not seem sure whether he would be able to compose any more poetry — it was a time when any kind of "plan" seemed futile — within three or four months he did start work upon another poem.
At first, no doubt , it was in the nature of an exercise just to see if he could still write: he was working very closely to the structure of "Burnt Norton" and seemed to be using the earlier poem as a model from which to draw inspiration.
He even used a place name gain as a title: it was called "East Coker" , the village from which Andrew Eliot had travelled more than two centuries  before.
He had visited the place in 1937 and it must have been on this occasion that he took photographs of the village and of St Michael's Church there (where later his ashes were to be interred).
By February 1940 he had drafted two out of the five sections, and was describing the poem as a successor to "Burnt Norton" — he was still not at all sure of its worth, however, since he seemed only to be imitating himself.
In spite of these reservations, he worked on the rest of the poem very quickly and its last three sections were drafted before the end of that month.
Copies were sent to John Hayward, Herbert Read, and perhaps others — from earliest days, as we have seen, he had relied upon the advice and encouragement of friends.
 "East Coker" was published in the Easter 1940 number of the New English Weekly, the journal for which he continued to write signed articles and anonymous editorials.
Such was its popularity that two reprints were ready in May and June of the same year; Faber and Faber published the poem as a pamphlet in September, and it sold almost 12,000 copies.
He told Anne Ridler some time later that such a success almost prompted him to believe that the poem was not very good, although no doubt he was being partly ironic: he was, at least, demonstrating the "usefulness" which a poet might possess in time of war.
Just as The Waste Land had once been taken as the expression of a "disillusioned" generation, in spite of Eliot's disavowals of any such intention, so "East Coker" seemed to be an expression of historical continuity at a time when it was most threatened: the retreat from France in May of that year aroused fears of a German invasion of England itself.
It was not, of course, a consciously propagandist poem, a poetic equivalent of Mrs Miniver; but, rather, it afforded consolation and the hope of release on a deeper level.
Just as the poem reflects on the literary tradition of which it is a part — Eliot mentioned his own deliberate use of Cleveland and Benlowes as well as Blake and early Yeats — it could also be read as a celebration of English history, of a tradition which would survive the betrayals of the contemporary generation:
There is only the fight to recover what has been lost And found and lost again and again: and now, under conditions That seem unpropitious.
The poem seemed to offer the possibility of regeneration ( "In my end is my beginning" is its last line) from a false civilization, and is in  that sense close in spirit to The Idea of a Christian Society , which also sold well during the war years.
At any rate, a reader might find these themes in the poem if he wished to, and Eliot was always prepared to concede the possibility of such meanings when they were discovered.
His own understanding of the poem, however, was a quite different thing and, as he explained to Anne Ridler, there was no central meaning, since he had attempted to find a method of uniting on an emotional level a variety of elements which were otherwise quite unrelated.
The success of "East Coker" emphasized what the critics had been saying since the publication of the Collected Poems four years before: Eliot was the most substantial, if no longer the most startling, poet writing in English.
This position was confirmed by the death of Yeats in 1939, and it was an apt image of succession that Eliot was asked to give the first Yeats memorial lecture at Dublin in June 1940.
He had become the representative voice of the nation under threat, and in the early months of 1940 he wrote a patriotic poem, "Defence of the Islands" , to accompany an exhibition of British war photographs at the New York World's Fair.
John Hayward was already assiduously collecting Eliot's letters and drafts for inclusion in what he called the "Archives" and Virginia Woolf noted in her diary that he had acquired a certain kind of writer's egotism and made remarks like, "Coleridge and I…" 
But the usefulness which he sought was not only that of a prominent poet, and in a postscript to The Idea of a Christian Society he had already discussed the need for "constructive thinking" during the war.
In February 1940 he had raised the possibility with Read of starting a group of "Anglo-French" intellectuals, with headquarters both in London and Paris, but Hitler's invasion of France rendered the idea inoperable.
The major forum for "constructive" thought remained in the Christian organizations of which he was already a member, and throughout the war he played a prominent part in their deliberations.
He regularly attended the fortnightly lunches, and sometimes all-day meetings, of the Chandos Group and joined most of the conferences of the Moot.
At one such conference in July 1940, he affirmed the need for "a re-education of the people's sense of values, from above" , and in April 1941 he talked about a "Fraternity dedicated to action" — a "revolution" led by people in certain key positions who would name the "enemies" .
This is  fighting talk, and suggests his fond memories of Maurras and the Action Française, but it was only talk — perhaps it was Eliot's way of enlivening what he thought to be the muted tone of discussion in England; perhaps it was also a method of inspiring his colleagues at the Moot whom he called "companions in affliction" , intellectuals or refugees who were on the periphery of events to which there was no foreseeable end.
His polemical attitudes were somewhat softened when it seemed that he might have to act upon them, and he found it necessary to disavow the political and social activism which members of the Moot such as Karl Mannheim wished to pursue.
As he explained to J. H. Oldham, the difficulty about "Christian action" was that it depended on which side of the equation you wished to stress.
In fact just as he relied upon intuition and perception rather than sustained argument in his prose discourse, so his public attitudes were imaginative rather than practical.
In a broadcast talk which he gave in the spring of 1941, "Towards a Christian Britain" , he talked about the sacrifices which would be necessary to bring about such a national conversion, and the need for Christian "prophets" who would alter the social consciousness of the people.
In this context, he described the life of Charles de Foucauld, a missionary who was killed in North Africa.
Such an image had little real relevance to the situation he was ostensibly addressing, although its private significance was such that it reappeared in his later creative work.
A more practical aspect of his campaign to reintroduce the principles of a Christian society in the rubble of the old is apparent in his association with the Christian News Letter.
This was established in 1939 by some of those involved in the Moot, and under the editorship of Oldham it consisted of a number of editorials combined with a long signed article from writers like Reinhold Niebuhr, Karl Barth and Dorothy L. Sayers.
The newspaper's first editorial offices were in Belgrave Square but, because of the dangers of bombing, they were moved to Mansfield College at Oxford where Eliot would travel each fortnight to take part in the editorial conferences.
There were occasions when he became "guest editor" of the paper, as for example in August 1940, and he often wrote leaders in his best Criterion style on subjects such as "Portugal" or "The Channel Islands" .
Although some years later he was to describe the kind of people with whom he now associated in a less than  enthusiastic manner, it was really only in such company that he could feel any sense of purposefulness.
There were, of course, various other schemes for social improvement, and at the beginning of 1940 Ezra Pound suggested to Eliot that they should combine forces with George Santayana and collaborate on a book which would describe the conditions for "The Ideal University" .
Eliot wrote back and discussed the matter; he was already formulating his own ideas on the general subject — he gave a paper on "The Christian Concept of Education" at a conference in Malvern in January 1941 — but, since they were markedly different from those of Pound, it is probable that he was only humouring him.
He did not, in any case, have a high opinion of Santayana — an animus which Santayana reciprocated towards Eliot.
Of course the idea came to nothing; in fact, one gets the impression, throughout this period, that there were a great many ideas floating about whose sole value was to console, and occupy the time of, those who had them.
Eliot's unsettled and uncomfortable life at Emperor's Gate continued throughout the larger part of 1940.
Although he had managed to complete "East Coker" there, his duties as an air-raid warden were becoming too arduous for him — he had to sit up two nights each week, and his general loss of sleep made any kind of work more difficult.
He was also anxious about the possibility of German attacks.
Even during the period of the "phoney war" he had fantasies of the house being bombed, and in June 1940 he asked Herbert Read to store in the country some of his books and clothes in order to prevent them from being destroyed in an air-raid.When on 7 September the "blitz" against London did begin, he decided that he no longer wished to stay in the capital.
and in October he moved down to Shamley Green, a village a few miles outside Guildford and within commuting distance of London.
Here he became what he described as a kind of paying guest with the Mirrlees.
He had known the writer Hope Mirrlees for some years, at first through her friendship with the Woolfs (the Hogarth Press had published her long poem, Paris, three years before The Waste Land), and she was now living with her mother and spinster aunt.
The company of women was by no means disagreeable — he had, after all, been brought up in a similar household — and the Mirrlees family  provided him with the kind of comfort and security which his life otherwise lacked.
Anthony Powell has recalled Eliot with the Mirrlees at the end of the period in which he was staying with them.
It seems that the aunt used to cadge cigarettes from Eliot, and Powell remembers how he used to enjoy long solitary walks, wearing a cap and carrying a stick.
Powell noticed, as others have, that he preferred to keep conversation to light topics — his manner was rather like that of a headmaster talking to the more intelligent boys.
But although he was so sensitive to conversation that he picked up the slightest nuance, his combination of "tea party cosiness and cold intellectuality" was "if not exactly intimidating, at least restraining" .
In spite of the predatory aunt, Shamley Green was to remain his home until the end of the war: he would engage in his ordinary business in London, and continue with his own writing in Surrey.
In the first months he travelled up to London on Wednesday, sometimes by train but often one of his neighbours, Sir Philip Gibbs, would drive him.
He would stay the night, and then return on Thursday evening with whatever correspondence there remained to deal with.
But he soon realized that he was leaving himself too little time for all the work he had to complete, and a regular routine of three days in London (generally from Tuesday to Thursday) and four days at Shamley Green was established instead.
When in London, he stayed with the Fabers; the capital was being bombed each night through the last months of 1940, but their house in Hampstead had the additional advantage of a reinforced basement shelter.
It was quieter there than elsewhere, and he found it easier to sleep.
His days in London were crowded with what were essentially business appointments — the regular book committee meeting at Faber and Faber on Wednesday itself took up the whole of the lunchtime and afternoon.
On other days, he tended to have lunch either at the Reform or at the Oxford and Cambridge Club; to judge by his correspondence, there were few occasions when he happened to be "free" and he was forced to arrange regular times in order to see close friends like Herbert Read.
In spite of his attempts to concentrate as much work as possible into his days in London, he still found he had to take a great deal of it back to Shamley Green.
Since he had no typist or secretary in the country, this meant that much of the time which he wished to devote  to his own work had to be spent on business correspondence.
At first he found the increase of activity made him feel healthier, but soon the exhaustion of travelling — and the waste of time involved — began to affect him.
The fact that he had very little free consecutive time for his own writing began to worry him a great deal, and he missed the familiar life of Kensington, with its public house and local shops.
But the old London was being destroyed around him, and on 29 December 1940, incendiary bombs set the City ablaze: life was peculiar now, he told Mary Hutchinson five days later, and in the preface to an anthology published in the following year, he discussed the problems of a "changing and bewildered world" .
His exhaustion as the result of his new regime, and the strange world in which he found himself, was compounded by the fact that he felt obliged to take on other responsibilities.
Not only was he engaged in his publishing work, his meetings of the Moot and the Chandos Group, and his visits to Oxford for the Christian News Letter, but also he set himself a punishing schedule of conferences, talks and lectures; in the first week of January 1941, for example, there were six full days of such conferences.
And indeed it was from this time that he began to suffer the kind of serious ill health which was regularly to affect him for the rest of his life.
Although his constitution was essentially a durable one (he was "tough" , his sister, Ada, had said), from the earliest days of his marriage he had in fact been prey to various kinds of viral infection.
It ought to be remembered that he was still forced to wear a truss because of his congenital hernia — no one has speculated on the physiological origins of his need for order and control — and that he was a victim of tachycardia.
In his later years, he was also to suffer from persistent bronchial trouble and emphysema exacerbated by his smoking.
In the winter of 1940–41, having moved to Shamley Green, he contracted influenza which he could not shake off: he spent half of January and most of February in bed, and was still recuperating at home in March.
He felt well enough some of the time, but whenever he came under mental or physical strain, he contracted a cough and a high temperature.
The fact that he also became unwell after meeting strangers emphasizes the partly nervous origin of his condition: it suggests a peculiar mixture of shyness and aversion, the misanthropy of a nervous man.
This impression is confirmed by a conversation Eliot had with George Seferis, the Greek poet, in  which he explained how uncomfortable he felt when he was forced to take shelter in an underground station during the blitz: "I would feel the need to get out as quickly as possible, to escape all those faces gathered there, to escape all that humanity" .
It is perhaps worth recalling the images of eyes which persist in his poetry — and "Don't look at me like that!" is also Harry Monchensey's cry in The Family Reunion .
 "Psychobiographical" accounts of Eliot have seized upon such references as evidence for his sense of guilt or unworthiness, but that is too deterministic.
The evidence for it is very thinly spread, although there is one rather strange letter written in this year to Mary Hutchinson, in which he questioned the importance which anyone attached to his friendship.
Whatever the causes, a pattern of illness was established in Eliot's now unsettled life, as it had been when he was living with Vivien.
After the influenza of the early months, he contracted further feverish colds, with attendant bronchial trouble, right up to the early summer.
When he spent the Whitsun weekend with John Hayward in Cambridge, he looked "very haggard and washed out and dispirited" and simply went to sleep on Hayward's bed for two afternoons.
X-rays showed that his teeth were partly the source of the trouble, and in July those at the back were removed in stages and dental plates inserted in their place.
The only advantage of illness, as far as Eliot was concerned, was that it released him from the general round of works and days — it was, he used to say, his body's way of telling him to stop — and during periods of ill health such as this one he seemed better able to write.
The relationship between illness and creativity interested him, and he often emphasized it in his prose writings.
In the conclusion to The Use of Poetry and the Use of Criticism, he had suggested that some forms of "debility, ill health and anaemia may produce an efflux of poetry" .
and referred to the same phenomenon in his introduction to Pascal's Pens, in which he declared that certain kinds of ill health may favour not only "religious illumination" but also "artistic and literary composition" .
This was part of his belief that poetic composition was not an activity that could be consciously controlled, that it had its roots far down in the unconscious.
The metaphors which he employs to describe this process are curiously disagreeable, however.
He talks of the "dark embryo" which gradually takes on the form of a poem, of "dark  psychic material" with which the poet struggles; it is a "burden" to be relieved or a "demon" to be exorcised.
This suggestion of a compulsive activity with which he wants as little to do as possible is confirmed by his description of poetry as a "secretion" (he quotes Housman favourably on this), an "evacuation" and even a "defecation" .
The impression given is of some sticky, viscous, unpleasant material which has to do with the satisfaction of obscure and uncontrollable personal needs.
Perhaps Eliot's attitude is an aspect of his puritanism: the pleasure involved in the"sudden relief of producing the poem is itself considered by him to be suspect.
Disgust with the body may be formulated as a disgust with the sheer materiality of words (the "secretion" ): hence the need to economize with them, to formalize them, to cut them down.
It was during the composition of "East Coker" at Emperor's Gate that the idea of a quartet of poems occurred to him, a sequence which would be loosely based upon the scheme of the four seasons and the four elements.
The possibility of a long poem clearly inspired him and, almost as soon as he had settled himself with the Mirrlees, he began to work upon the next poem in the sequence.
He was already feeling ill by Christmas, but nevertheless he was writing extraordinarily rapidly and by 1 January 1941 he sent a first draft of the poem, tentatively entitled "Dry Salvages" , to John Hayward.
Queries and corrections passed between them throughout the month — a process in which Geoffrey Faber joined — and "The Dry Salvages" was published in the New English Weekly in February.
The poem takes its title from a ledge of rock off Cape Ann which acted as a seamark when Eliot, as a boy, used to sail out of Gloucester Harbour, and its first lines evoke the presence of the Mississippi which he had felt as a child in St Louis.
Many years before, he had contemplated writing a book of essays about his childhood experience to be entitled The River and the Seal and in "The Dry Salvages" these images of childhood return.
There are other images, too: he mentions the "ailanthus" , one of which stood in the yard of the Mary Institute where he had once played, and the "briar rose" by his father's house in Gloucester; in addition, he employs words like "rote" or "groaner" which he had heard as a child in New England.
At a time when his life was unsettled and the future uncertain, he returns to the world of his childhood and, in the course  of the poem, meditates upon the need for release from the wheel of time itself, "the trailing/Consequence of further days and hours" .
Almost immediately after completing the poem, he began in the early months of 1941 to work on the fourth in the sequence; it was entitled "Little Gidding" .
This was the name of the place which he had visited five years before; he had gone almost in the role of a pilgrim, since it was there that Nicholas Ferrar established a small Anglican religious community in the seventeenth century — a familial life led in poverty, discipline and prayer which was extirpated by Parliamentary troops in 1646.
Eliot recognized that this was not simply the last poem in his sequence but also its culmination, in which the themes and textures of the preceding three parts would be gathered together in a final statement.
He had completed a first draft by July 1941, but he told Hayward that he was not pleased with the result because he was over-conscious of what he was attempting to do: "he was always aware of this problem in his work, and it had effectively led him to abandon much of the poetry he had been writing in his Harvard years.
The difficulty was that he had started work on the poem before he had adequately prepared himself, although his haste was understandable.
For the previous ten months London and provincial cities had been bombed night after night (on 10 May, three thousand Londoners were killed in the raids); although the worst of the blitz was now over, no one knew it then, and at this perilous juncture in the war Eliot had been anxiously writing against time.
As Mass Observation noted,"One very vital effect of the air-raids is this blurring of the future.
There is a tendency for people's whole outlook to be foreshortened, so that life exists from day to day"— and Eliot was by no means immune from such general fears.
These external pressures meant that he was writing "Little Gidding" quickly but mechanically; the material was not properly seasoned and the first version of the poem lacked the presence of concealed private memories which would make the language cohere.
Although he put the poem to one side it still continued to worry him, and in October he explained to Mary Hutchinson that the contemporary situation was such that only good work was appropriate; bad writing, after all, would seem even more trivial or superfluous.
The parlous state of England enters the poem, in fact, in a direct way: "Dust in the air suspended/Marks the place where a story ended," was an evocation of the debris which  hung in the air after a bombing, and then "would slowly descend and cover one's sleeves and coat with fine white ash" .
This is one of the few indications that Eliot gave of the fact that, in the periods between illness when he carried on with his ordinary duties in London (as much as anyone's life was "ordinary" then), he experienced the horror of the German raids: the nightly bombings, the streets blocked with rubble, the glow in the evening as fires burned throughout the city, and the peculiarly dank smell of ruined buildings: it was this which provoked fear, precluded concentration on other things, and destroyed the will to work.
Like everyone else's in this period, his life became one of monotony and anxiety, caught in a middle period when pre-war life seemed unreal and post-war life unimaginable.
It was a time of physical and social constraints also, when more arduous duties and responsibilities had to be fulfilled in less and less time.
His existence was swallowed up in the gloom and horror of the entire country — he did not, in other words, lead a private life in the sense in which that was true before the war.
But he might at least be "useful" , as he had wanted, and part of that usefulness lay in the fact that, on one level at least, his poetry could have a public and national purpose — although, when the war had been won, he no longer cared to draw attention to those aspects of it.
Some years later, in a draft version of "The Three Voices of Poetry" , he wrote that the last three quartets were patriotic poems; then he crossed out the remark.
Although the three earlier poems had been highly praised and widely read — their reception, Hayward told Frank Morley, had boosted Eliot's reputation at a time when it was in danger of being obscured by younger poets — he was unable to finish the sequence.
But the reasons were not entirely those of restlessness and imaginative deficiency.
He had been anxious to finish "Little Gidding" partly in order to get on with other jobs, particularly since he had spent so much of the early part of 1941 in seclusion in Shamley Green because of ill health, and these pre-empted his time and concentration.
Even while he was working on the first draft of the poem, he was writing to Martin Browne about all the engagements ahead.
In September 1941, he had to be in Wales and Oxford, and in the following month he travelled to Bristol, Wells, Durham and Newcastle — each appointment requiring the preparation of a lecture or talk.
In addition he was having to select, and write an essay for, A  Choice of Kipling's Verse which was to be published at the end of the year — even this, given the nature of Kipling's poetry, might be described as "war work" .
Public activity of this kind was, he said, a kind of sedative — no doubt to counteract feelings of uselessness — but it did mean that he was forced to postpone any creative work.
His engagements in the early months of 1942 were equally arduous.
In February he lectured on "The Music of Poetry" at Glasgow University and in April gave an address to the classical Association on "The Classic and the Man of Letters" .
At the end of this month he travelled to Sweden on a tour organized by the British Council; it lasted five weeks, and he gave a number of readings in Stockholm, Upsala, Lund and elsewhere.
When he came back, he took his turn as "guest editor" of the Christian News Letter and attended a conference at Wadham College for the Christian Frontier Council.
These duties had to be fulfilled alongside those of his conventional publishing business, and he was also supposed to be writing a scene for inclusion in what was to be a filmed version of Murder in the Cathedral.
He did not feel he could work on such a project, however, until "Little Gidding" was finished.
But it was not until August 1942, after a year's delay, that he set to work on the poem again.
It was by far the most laboriously produced of the sequence: there are some five drafts, and thirteen separate typescripts, extant.
Some of it had come quickly; Eliot knew the verse was right, and left it alone.
But the rest needed more attention.
He composed a short preliminary scheme for the entire poem, as well as prose drafts for certain difficult passages.
(For "The Dry Salvages" he had even written out lists of rhyming words to assist him.)
Like his pleasure in reading dictionaries or solving crosswords, this seemed to be the kind of soothing conscious activity which allowed the unconscious faculties an easier passage forward.
Having constructed a working model, as it were, he left his conscious mind to one side and relied upon his ear — what he described as the interdependence of rhythm and diction, or the recognition of meaning when it is embodied in cadence.
In fact what he called the "auditory imagination" was always his most powerful faculty, the most subtle and complex instrument at his disposal which he deserted at his peril.
When in Four Quartets he was concerned to state or develop a theme, he frequently relapsed into flatness or banality.
But in almost all instances lie recovered himself in the  process of revision, took out the passages which were rhythmically inert or altered words and images which did not sustain the underlying cadence and structure.
Throughout August and early September he was engaged in this process, with drafts going between Hayward and himself, until on 19 September he sent Hayward the final version.
With one or two minor changes, this was the poem published in the New English Weekly in October 1942.
The sequence was now complete: although he had originally wanted to entitle it Kensington Quartets, in memory of his residence there, it was called Four Quartets.
The publication of his work generally provoked in Eliot a sense of release — he had evacuated something, to use one of his favourite expressions, and was left with an agreeable sensation of vacancy — and after the appearance of "Little Gidding" in the autumn, he did not expect to do any serious intellectual work during the winter.
In any case it seemed at this point that the war might be lost, and only a month after finishing the poem he was expressing to Martin Browne grave misgivings about the worth and value of his poetic activities, which often appeared to be futile.
Throughout the autumn and winter he suffered from feverish colds and attacks of bronchitis, and was often forced to take to his bed for a week or fortnight at a time.
One observer who met him in November of this year at Lady Colefax recollected that "he seemed to be holding himself together, almost as if he were a piece of riveted china" ."
He tried fitfully to proceed with a short prose book on the nature of culture which he had been contemplating for some time, but by the end of 1942 had produced only a first draft of two chapters: this must be the source of the four essays which appeared in the New English Weekly during January and February 1943 under the title, "Notes toward a Definition of Culture" .
In April he was still having difficulty in completing the book and in a letter to Henry Treece in September he was again expressing doubts about himself as a writer.
But the main reason for his slowness in composing it was that he felt obliged to take on what he called "odd jobs" .
He continued to give lectures, readings and radio talks.
He was also working for the British Council, writing for foreign magazines and attending functions organized by the Anglo-Swedish Society or the Norwegian Institute, as well as seeing American G.I.s stationed in London — it seemed to him on occasions that every American  sergeant wrote verse.
But he took such duties seriously; he often had to give his opinion on the work of young poets who were about to be dispatched into the war: and he knew that his comments might be the last they ever received.
He was now in London from Tuesday to Friday, and tended to stay in a flat at the office in Russell Square.
This was principally because he had taken up fire-watching duties there, and once or twice a week he would go up on the roof: he would have heard the sound of the aircraft, and the bursts of shrapnel from the anti-aircraft guns, while all the time scrutinizing the "blacked out" city for the evidence of fires.
Since he suffered from vertigo, this was not a comfortable experience for him.
From Friday evening to Tuesday, he was at Shamley Green, and although he tried to avoid visiting people or seeing his neighbours his weekends were often occupied, which meant that a fortnight might elapse before he could get on with his own work.
It is no wonder that in March 1943 he was suffering from fatigue which again brought on influenza.
He found the time and energy, however, to write a pamphlet attacking a scheme for Church Union in South India.
It was called "Reunion by Destruction" and in it Eliot set out his reasons for opposing the idea of uniting the Anglican, Presbyterian, Congregationalist and Methodist churches.
He confessed that the model he had in mind was Pascal's letters, but alas his pamphlet has not achieved a similar immortality.
Although he was thus once more diverted from his book, he was nevertheless discussing the principles behind it in a variety of different contexts.
He had become involved in the administration of St Anne's House in Soho, for example; it had been opened this year as a "centre of Christian discourse" , and in the autumn he and Philip Mairet conducted a discussion group, "Toward the Definition of Culture" which met once a week until the middle of December.
In this year, he was appointed President of the English Circle of Books Across the Sea, and also became a member of the Apollo Society which was dedicated to reviving "the neglected art of reading poetry and to show that poetry and music can be regarded as complementary" .
Indeed in April he had proved that such reading was an art: the Sitwells had organized an evening for the Free French in the Aeolian Hall, and in front of the Queen he gave a memorable and dramatic performance of "What the Thunder Said" .
That poetry had been written at Lausanne more than twenty years before, in a world which was now disappearing.
James Joyce and Virginia Woolf were dead, Charles Maurras was a member of the Petain government and would soon be imprisoned for treason, Ezra Pound was about to be indicted on similar charges (although Eliot refused to assist the Federal Bureau of Investigation in their inquiries about him).
In these last years of the war, he was simply continuing with his life, going on from day to day without much hope for the future.
Certainly the lectures which he delivered in 1944 — "Johnson as Critic and Poet" at University College, Bangor, "What Is Minor Poetry?" to the Association of Bookmen in Swansea, "What Is A Classic?" to the Virgil Society, of which he was president — are not among his best, the latter seeming particularly forced and mechanical.
The German blitz was resumed in the early months of this year and then a fresh terror, the "flying bombs" , was directed against London in the summer.
No doubt Eliot's own fears and uncertainty were compounded when in June a bomb fell upon the offices of Faber and Faber (fortunately, he was not up on the roof at the time).
The business was able to carry on but the flat he sometimes used was uninhabitable; he came up to London only on Tuesday nights and "camped out" for the fire-watching while for the rest of the time he commuted between London and Surrey.
In August he was again complaining of tiredness; there was no doubt that like most other Englishmen he was experiencing what he described in another context as a general weariness of war and desire for peace.
Nevertheless his poetry, as he said in an interview some years later, had "connected the wartime work very well" and "fitted in very nicely to the conditions under which I was writing" .
The reviews of each separate quartet had on the whole been favourable and when the complete edition of Four Quartets was published at the end of October, there was general assent about his achievement.
The volume had been published in the United States the year before, and the American critics had been more divided in their response.
Although there was almost unanimous praise of Eliot's poetic or sheerly musical abilities (which in any case had their roots deep in his American experience), there was a certain distrust of the religious sensibility which seemed to be expressed in the sequence.
These responses mark an important distinction in the later  appreciation of Eliot.
The respect afforded him in England had partly to do with the manner in which he had taken on the mantle of English culture; in the absence of any figure with equivalent influence, he was eventually to be invested with an almost shamanistic authority.
The American critics, to whom it was rapidly becoming clear that the dominant culture was to be their own, were sceptical of his Anglicanism and Toryism.
They were looking on things new born, it seemed, while he was preoccupied with that which was dying.
Four Quartets was recognized as an extraordinary tour de force, however, in which the balance between stylistic adaptation, lyric statement and dramatic narrative had been maintained throughout.
In order to describe the sequence, we need only turn to the lectures which Eliot gave during and just after its composition: here he talked almost coyly of a poem which might develop themes instrumentally and arrange transitions "comparable to the different movements of a symphony or a quartet" , of a poem elaborate enough to exercise the dramatic, descriptive and narrative talents of its maker.
All of which suggests what the drafts of the poems confirm — that he knew, or wanted to know, exactly what he was doing.
The context in which he was working was now a quite different one.
Although he had neither the time nor the opportunity to continue with his verse drama, the subject was never far from his mind.
In the Yeats memorial lecture in Dublin, for example, he talked about the theatre as a medium for "the expression of the consciousness of a people" and two years later he castigated the failure of most poetic drama to evoke the rhythms of "colloquial speech" ; he returned to this theme a year later when, in a preface to S. L. Bethell's Shakespeare and the Popular Dramatic Tradition, he described the language of poetic drama as the language which people "would speak today if they could speak in poetry" .
This is precisely what he had been attempting in "The Dry Salvages" , for example, and it is significant that he used much the same phrase in his demand that contemporary poetry should have such a strong relationship to current speech that "the listener or reader can say" that is how I should talk if I could talk poetry".
This identification of poetry and drama, and its connection with his own poetic practice, suggests the real direction of his concerns.
Again and again in his wartime lectures, he stressed the need in poetry for a "common  style" , a "common language of the people" , "the attempt to reflect" the changing language of common intercourse".
Even his understanding of musical pattern and musical form, which in practice was for him a deeply instinctive activity, was discussed in terms of the musical pattern which is "latent in common speech" .
This emphasis upon a common style is partly connected with that sense of national identity and community which the war provoked, but it was also intimately related to Eliot's preoccupation with what he termed "The Social Function of Poetry" in both developing the language, and enriching the sensibility, of the culture.
As the years passed, he was beginning to sound more and more like Matthew Arnold — although Arnold was never quite able to practise what he preached.
However, Eliot was, and it is in this context that Four Quartets should be seen.
He was deliberately adapting his dramatic experience for use in poetic composition, since for the first time in his "pure" poetry he was addressing an audience.
His emphasis on the "common style" suggests that he is no longer interested in talking to himself but to others, and Four Quartets is at one level an oratorical performance: it would not be too much to say that all of his previous work has led him to this point, where poetry is married with public exhortation.
Certainly the sequence is the most elaborately and intricately shaped of all his poetry.
Each of the four poems has five sections, and each of the sections reflects upon its counterparts in the other poems; just as each poem develops and resolves its theme, so "Little Gidding" gathers up the three preceding ones in a magisterial synthesis.
Eliot also introduces deliberate traces of his earlier writing from sources as disparate as "La Figlia Che Piange" and The Family Reunion.
No poet in the twentieth century has had such a conscious sense of his own work, or of the tradition in which he was operating.
For not only does he emphasize the continuity of his poetic development but he also introduces echoes and half-parodic reminiscences of the English and European literary inheritance of which he was a beneficiary.
He had been doing that throughout his poetry — as he had said more than thirty years earlier, in "Portrait of a, Lady" , "And I must borrow every changing shape/To find expression…" but the process reaches its culmination in "Little Gidding" where he creates a replica of Dante's terza rima :
In the uncertain hour before the morning
Near the ending of interminable night
At the recurrent end of the unending…
In a lecture which he delivered before completing the poem, he had described the "unity" of "English letters of the past" and related it to a recognizable entity called European literature".
Four Quartets offers an image of that "entity" , and the figure who appears in the Dantesque passage is a "familiar compound ghost" in whom Eliot suggested we might recognize Yeats, Mallarmé, Swift and Poe.
And yet in the same lecture he had expressed his belief that the tradition of which he spoke was drawing to a close; and, in the poem, the encounter with the familiar but only half-glimpsed figure is charged with a sense of transitoriness and loss:
The day was breaking.
In the disfigured street
He left me, with a kind of valediction,
And faded on the blowing of the horn.
In "Little Gidding" , and in Four Quartets as a whole, we see the outlines of a tradition, beautifully limned but shimmering like an hallucination before it disappears and the sirens of a catastrophic European war intrude.
This ambivalence between the formal order of the poem and troubled intimations of its own fragility, between its eloquent directness and the presence of Eliot's private memories concealed beneath the surface of that eloquence, gives the poem its power.
As a result, any attempt to explicate the theme of the sequence is bound to run into peculiar difficulties, although there have been various attempts to interpret it in Christian, symbolist or political terms.
Eliot once explained that, even if a poem meant different things to different readers, it was still necessary to assert its absolute"meaning.
This paradox is strongly reminiscent of Bradleyan idealism, and to understand the nature of Four Quartets it is appropriate to recall what Eliot as a student considered to be one of the central principles of Bradley's thought: that, for the sceptic faced with the possibility of acquiring only relative truth, coherence and comprehensiveness were important for their own sake.
In Four Quartets, Eliot is providing a consummation of the European tradition, just as he is offering a coherent account of his  own poetic development.
At a late date in our cultural history, he had created a language both formal and authoritative.
And yet we know the conditions under which the sequence was written and notice how fragile it is, how much a willed order, and how dependent upon a bravura performance — and suspect that it is from these elements that the permanent value of the poetry springs.
In March 1945, a few weeks before the German surrender, Eliot was expressing his pessimism about the future; a few days later he wrote his last commentary for the Christian News Letter and used the pseudonym of "Metoikos" or "resident alien" .
In May, just before VE Day, he travelled to Paris in order to lecture on "The Social Function of Poetry" and took the opportunity to bring small presents of soap, China tea, and other commodities to old friends there like Sylvia Beach.
But he felt no exhilaration, and he did not participate in the public celebrations after the surrender of the Japanese; the noise of the fireworks actually disturbed him more than the bombs of the blitz.
He was suffering from an infected throat as a result of another poisoned tooth, and in November he was feeling too ill to go out in the evenings.
His depression had been caused at first by what he considered to be the disturbing condition of the victors after the war: he was uneasy about the foreign policy of both England and the United States, as well as about the intentions of Russia.
But his gloomy prognostications were also of a more general kind, and in January 1946 he described a public world which was becoming more "incredible" and a private world which was more "intolerable" .
The world was a less "moral" place than it had been before the war: Germany and Japan had brought to a crisis the sickness which infected civilization, but their collapse had not cured it but left it raging everywhere."
In the late Thirties, in that period which he described as more "moral" , he had affirmed the need for something very like a Christian revolution which might alter the structure.
and would certainly change the principles, of English society.
The advent of a Labour government, and the dominance of America in post-war Europe, prompted a change of emphasis, and his abiding preoccupation came to be with the survival of European civilization itself.
Even before the war was won, he had been afraid that peace might  be associated only with the concept of "efficiency" , and in radio talks in 1946 he spoke of the necessity for maintaining the "spiritual organization" as well as the "material organization" of Europe.
There was a prospect ahead of "centuries of barbarism" which, in an interview the year before, he had already related to the coming dominance of technology.
The barbarians did not arrive in his lifetime, but there is no doubt that Eliot was aware that he was witnessing the end of that culture which, more than thirty years before, he had travelled to Europe to find.
It is paradoxical, perhaps, that in these post-war years he came to enjoy his greatest fame and, in the end, happiness.
The Rigours of Life
1946–1949
After the conclusion of hostilities, Eliot began the process of readjustment to the more settled but no less uncomfortable conditions of peace.
He had already considered returning to London in the closing stages of the war, but had thought better of it.
But, in the summer of 1945, he took a furnished room in Kensington and began to look for a suitable and convenient residence of his own.
Most of the places he saw were uninhabitable, or required a permit from the Office of Works to make them less so, but a friend of John Hayward told him of some rooms in Carlyle Mansions, a Victorian apartment building along the Chelsea Embankment which looks out over the Thames.
In early 1946 he moved into 19 Carlyle Mansions, a large and comfortable flat on the third floor, beneath the one in which Henry James had once lived.
Eliot had already agreed to share his new home with John Hayward who, having supervised its decoration, joined him a month after Eliot had "settled in" ; for the next eleven years this was to be their mutual address.
John Hayward had, in fact, first suggested in 1935 that they should set up house together, but Eliot chose not to do so.
He was then staying with Father Cheetham and, since Vivien was still in pursuit of him, he preferred the relative anonymity and seclusion of his status as a "guest" .
The two men knew each other much better now but, on the face of it, despite their joint passion for Sherlock Holmes and Eliot's reliance upon Hayward's editorial skills (not only did he inspect the poetry, but he also removed social malapropisms from the drama), they were an oddly matched pair.
Hayward was gregarious, a great attender of dinners and parties, but he could also be a caustic and gossipy creature given to telling salacious stories.
He was a man whose sexual energies had been forced inwards through his crippling disease, and had taken the form of mental  passion which found relief in meticulous scholarship and mild prurience.
His confinement to a wheelchair had made him defensively aware of his reliance upon other people, as well, and Anthony Powell has described him as "at once nervous and dominating" with a manner which "could at times approach the positively tyrannical" .
And so what was the bond between the two men?
Eliot certainly appreciated Hayward's caustic wit and was himself, according to Hayward, "…a connoisseur of the ridiculous, an ironical commentator on human folly, a lover of allusive quotation (particularly from the dicta of Sherlock Holmes and other eminent detectives), and a passionate observer of what may be called the Bouvard et Pécuchet way of life" .
But such a shared interest would scarcely be enough to form such a strong friendship.
Of course Hayward's physical condition was such that he could no longer live alone — he had spent the war years as a guest of the Rothschilds in Cambridge and there must have been an element of sympathy or even pity in Eliot's invitation to him; the presence of old-fashioned Yankee rectitude in his character, and the quiet acceptance of "duty" in his role as Hayward's companion and helper, cannot be ignored.
He would quite willingly lay aside his own business in order to take Hayward to a party, or wheel him in a park.
But if he was a useful companion for Hayward, there were also ways in which Hayward could be of benefit to him.
Eliot was a lonely man, and Hayward was the only single person he knew with whom he could share a flat.
Solitude one can endure; mundane loneliness is more difficult to bear.
Hayward was also a dutiful editor and keeper of the Eliot "Archives" , as his work on Four Quartets showed, and in addition his role was that of a social bulwark.
There were times when Eliot seemed uncertain or ill at ease, suddenly very much the "resident alien" — one has the impression, always, of a man invaded by inexplicable moods and anxieties which he did his best to conceal — and Hayward's own dominating and very English manner afforded him at such times a certain amount of confidence.
Although Hayward might talk about his "lodger" in a jocular fashion, he was proud of his association with the great man of letters and defended both his privacy and reputation.
Sometimes he seemed to act almost as his "representative on earth" ; when Cecil Day Lewis was asked by The Times to compose Eliot's obituary, he suggested to Hayward that they collaborate upon it.
It was clearly a delicate matter, with Eliot's wife in a mental  hospital, and Day Lewis wrote to Haywood, "I hope you feel my reference to his private tragedy is passable…" 
Eliot, then, had a staunch defender.
There are many reminiscences of the two men together at Carlyle Mansions — Hayward talkative and Eliot silent, Hayward persuading Eliot to quote from memory long passages from the Sherlock Holmes stories (there was an element of putting his famous companion "on show" in such circumstances, although his disease allowed him a certain immunity from conventional social niceties), Eliot on occasions reciting his poetry with "an actor's pleasure" I Eliot standing behind Hayward's wheelchair at literary parties — almost at attention, as one observer noticed.
And then there were the weekend expeditions through Chelsea, generally in the afternoon, when Eliot would push Hayward across the bridge to Battersea Gardens or along Chelsea Embankment to the gardens of the Royal Hospital.
They were often accompanied on such excursions by Christopher Sykes, who has recalled one wet Saturday afternoon when, in the Hospital gardens, they watched a football match between the Marylebone dustmen and the Chelsea Municipal Maintenance Staff: "The forlorn scene fascinated Eliot and in spite of the cold and the drizzle he stayed and watched for several minutes" .
Perhaps he was wearing his customary flat cap and voluminous raincoat, but there is in any case something highly appropriate about this scene of forlornness and dampness; the picture of Eliot in a prospect of drizzle evokes a quality in the man himself.
There was indeed an element of almost willed despondency in his character in these post-war years.
In Carlyle Mansions itself, Hayward's own rooms were at the front of the building and looked over the river and the gardens while Eliot satisfied himself with a study and bedroom down a dark passage at the back of the building.
They were small and cheerless rooms.
His bedroom was lit by a bare electric lightbulb, there was an ebony crucifix above his single bed, and the window looked out upon a brick wall.
His study resembled that "of a nineteenth-century pedagogue or parson" .
In the same way he himself seemed to be acquiring a greater and greater starkness, and soon after settling into Carlyle Mansions the order of his new life emerged.
In the morning he would leave the flat at 6.30 and take the bus to St Stephen's at Gloucester Road, his familiar church, for early  morning Mass.
On his return home he would eat a large English breakfast and, before starting on his work, would play a hand or two of patience and begin The Times crossword.
Then he would go to his study and attend to his own writing, characteristically composing straight onto the typewriter and standing at a kind of lectern.
At about noon he would leave Carlyle Mansions for Faber and Faber, complete with battered briefcase, dark suit (with a white handkerchief in the breast pocket) and rolled umbrella.
He would catch the bus to Piccadilly Circus — he sat on the top deck and worked on the crossword before turning to the company reports in The Times.
He remained, as it were, invisible.
When on one occasion a young Indian student approached him and asked if he was T. S. Eliot, he looked up at her in alarm, agreed that he was, and got off the bus.
Generally, however, he travelled undisturbed; he would alight from the bus at Piccadilly Circus and then take the underground railway to Russell Square.
Even in the years of his greatest fame, he continued with the routine business of publishing.
For a man who found it difficult to write for more than three hours a day it was one way of passing time but, more importantly, as he explained in an address in 1951, it was necessary for him to hold a job which other people considered useful; he had so little confidence in his own work that he did not want to risk wasting all of his time upon it.
(There is no doubt, however, that his fame was useful to the firm with which he was so closely associated.)
His day at Faber and Faber was well regulated also.
There was, of course, the usual business of a publisher — "blurbs" , reports, memos, correspondence with authors and negotiations with agents.
Book committee day was Wednesday (later moved to Tuesday), when the board would lunch together and spend the afternoon discussing the week's business: considering written reports, commenting upon manuscripts received, arguing about the merits of ideas proposed for new books, and so on.
Anne Ridler noticed how Eliot "affected a certain detachment from the proceedings, and did The Times crossword during the meetings, but his business judgments were as shrewd as anyone's…" 
Having been involved in such proceedings since the Twenties he was now in fact finding them "a bit tedious" , and "Mr Eliot's list" was invented for a section of the agenda so that he did not have to attend the entire meeting.
His main areas were those of poetry and theology; sometimes, when discussing the manuscripts of poetry received, his laconic comment was "All out" .
On other days of the week he had fixed luncheon dates which, because of his crowded schedule and not infrequent trips abroad, were arranged well in advance.
He would generally lunch in one of the clubs to which he belonged (by the end of his life, he was a member of the Athenaeum, the Garrick, and the Oxford and Cambridge) although there were occasions when he would take guests to his favourite restaurant, L'Etoile, in Charlotte Street.
After lunch he returned to his office where he would continue with his ordinary duties until the ritual of tea at four, when he would receive visitors.
He would then work until approximately 6.00 or 6.30, and if there was no social or literary event he felt obliged to attend, would take a taxi back to Carlyle Mansions.
(He was in every respect a most economical man, and, like many of his generation, continued to think of taxis as an expensive luxury long after he could easily afford them.)
If he returned home in the evening he would sometimes dine with John Hayward but, since Hayward was an inveterate diner-out, he would often eat alone from a tray on his knees.
After dinner he might finish some pressing publishing work, correcting manuscripts or writing blurbs; if not inveigled by Hayward into escorting him to a party, or sitting with guests in the shared "living room" , he would retire to his own rooms for study or contemplation.
Wednesday night was the housekeeper's night "off" , and then Eliot might have dinner with friends at L'Etoile.
Sometimes he and Hayward would invite friends to dinner at the Good Intent, a restaurant in the Kings Road, or entertain at home.
Their neighbour, the writer Julia Strachey, found them "congenial souls and seeing them does cheer one up" , although she recalled one evening when Eliot suddenly emerged in a dressing gown apparently"utterly distraught and Strindbergian, with his at-all-times remarkable manner accentuated into something ghostly and weird.
I wondered for a moment if he was dead drunk; but I fancy not."
It is an unexplained incident, and in any case such moments were rarely visible to outsiders.
The essential feature of the life which Eliot had constructed for himself is that it contained as few surprises as possible: it has been said that, for over thirty years, he patronized the same tailor, the same tobacconist and the same wine merchant.
Such was the existence of the poet.
There was a time  for everything — a time for eating, a time for talking, a time for writing.
It was all of a piece: his own conversation was unhurried and controlled and, when he spoke, he made few if any gestures.
 "This is T. S. Eliot here," he would say on the telephone; it was an instrument he detested and when using it his voice had "a curiously strangled sound" .
One friend has described him checking his wristwatch with an almost deliberate thoroughness: "He slowly and methodically raised his left hand and with his right hand carefully pushed back his coat sleeve and shirt sleeve at the same time and then painstakingly, at close range, studied the face of the dial.
There is a sense of effort trying to vanquish inertia here, as though physical movements were difficult for him; but the prevailing impression is of a man who found comfort and relief in an ordered and disciplined life.
Perhaps that is why one of his major recreations, apart from the reading of detective stories and the novels of P. G. Wodehouse, was playing the card game, patience.
As his American publisher, Robert Giroux, put it, "The typical image of the period was Eliot playing solitaire" ; Eliot's first housekeeper, an Irish lady, had a similar impression.
 "I've known many a writing man," she told one of his friends,"and he's no writing man, Mr Eliot.
He's a very holy man…
It'll be playing patience I've only seen him doing".
When W. H. Auden once found him playing that game and asked him why he seemed to relish it, he reflected gravely and then replied, "Well, I suppose it's the nearest thing to being dead" .
This sounds like one of his more severe remarks, although perhaps an ironical inflection has not survived its reporting.
There was certainly a large element of irony in his demeanour and conversation, although it was a quality not immediately apparent when he was in the company of more sober or "respectable" people; in those circumstances he could, as it were, give as good as he got.
He gave the impression to some people of resembling a "senior civil servant" , as Lawrence Durrell put it, emphasized by his "impenetrable reserve" and "inscrutable courtesy" .
But it has to be remembered that he was now being treated by many people with extreme deference, mixed, with not a little nervousness, and it is very difficult to behave normally in such circumstances.
When he was with close friends, he abandoned that somewhat starched public demeanour.
One such friend has recalled how observant and amusing he could be, how quick to comment upon other people's  expressions or appearance which he would associate with psychological traits.
His fondness for practical jokes made him on occasions a "tormenting tease" , according to John Hayward, and he never lost his "satirical wit" .
Instances of that wit are, at this late date, rather hard to obtain, although E. W. F. Tomlin has remembered two small examples.
When Eliot heard that Wyndham Lewis had been travelling around North Africa in a thick English suit, he remarked, "Lewis was always a heavily dressed man" ; and of a lady who had acquired too many petrol coupons during the first year of the war, he said, "There is always bound to be a certain element of iniquity in these matters" .
They are not perhaps the kind of remarks to be found in Christmas crackers, but they suggest that his humour was bound up with the idea of self-parody: he is mocking the pontifical manner which others associated with him.
His letters to friends are often funny in a less self-conscious way, and he will ramble in a high-spirited or nonsensical manner about nothing in particular.
Such humour even stretched to the envelopes, and those addressed to friends such as Clive Bell often had on them verse instructions to the postman.
One such friend with whom he could relax, and to whom he sent a great deal of comic correspondence, was Mary Trevelyan.
He had first met her in 1938, when she invited him to give a reading at the Student Movement House of which she was Warden.
During the war these readings were an annual event, and she became a close friend.
In fact, it seems that only with women was Eliot ever fully at ease; Mary Trevelyan herself was funny, highly intelligent without being particularly "literary" , and socially astute — she was able to "cope" with the world in a way that he was never quite able to.
They would attend parties or receptions (often fortifying themselves with a drink or two in advance), and would frequently dine together.
She was a good pianist, as well, and he enjoyed listening to her play.
Their friendship was intimate but Platonic, and it was one in which Mary Trevelyan acted both as a confidante and social support.
She helped him in other ways also — she was a chauffeuse on occasions, tended him when he was ill, and sometimes acted as a secretary.
Certain drafts of The Cocktail Party, for example, are marked with Mary Trevelyan's handwritten alterations "as dictated by T. S. E." From the late Forties she kept a diary of their friendship, and in this it is possible to see how bewildering Eliot could appear, even to those  who knew him best.
It seems that she had fallen in love with him but she "didn't know where I was at all" with him; he would be most affectionate towards her and then, for no apparent reason, seemed to avoid her for protracted periods.
This was not a novel characteristic, and other friends in the past had noticed the alterations between "thaw" and "freeze" in his relationships with them.
He did not want anyone to get too close to him, especially after his years with Vivien, and there was a point at which he withdrew from those who expected too great an intimacy.
This might simply be the expression of a natural hauteur, or even of a Puritan dislike for self-revelation; he also seemed to fear that other people would "take advantage" of him but, more importantly, there is a sense in which he felt threatened by the personalities of others — as if he might be invaded by them.
If he was a difficult friend, he could also be a loyal one — the most notable example, of course, is that of Ezra Pound whom he continued to support and defend even though it meant that he became embroiled in the kind of public controversy which he detested.
During the war Pound had broadcast over Rome Radio a number of bitter attacks on Roosevelt, Churchill and the Jews.
In May 1945 he was arrested by the American forces and taken to a Disciplinary Training Centre near Pisa, before being flown back to Washington to stand trial for treason.
Eliot must have heard of his arrest during or just after his visit to Paris at the beginning of that month since, on his return, he immediately sent a cable to Archibald MacLeish, the poet who was then Assistant Secretary of State, saying that he was eager to help Pound in any way he could.
Pound did not reach Washington, however, until the middle of November 1945 and the first real chance Eliot had to acquaint himself with the situation was on the business trip to the United States which he planned for June and July of 1946.
Two months before his departure he wrote to twelve or fifteen poets, requesting their public support for Pound and asking them to provide private testimonials in the event that he should be tried and sentenced for his crime: there was, at this stage, a strong possibility that Pound would be condemned to death.
In July, two or three weeks after arriving in the United States, Eliot travelled to Washington in order to visit Pound at St Elizabeth's, the asylum where he was being held.
He told the  American poet, Allen Tate, after the meeting that Pound's character had not really altered: he had covered so many subjects during their brief meeting, for example, that Eliot could not remember much about them afterwards.
Robert Lowell has transcribed Eliot's account of another such meeting in his Notebook: "You speak," he said, when he'd talked two hours.
By then I had absolutely nothing to say.
After his return to England, he explained to Dorothy Pound that her husband needed somehow to be calmed down.
There was a reasonable chance that he might be released from St Elizabeth's: Eliot himself suggested a private sanatorium, to be followed by a retreat in California or New Mexico.
He also wanted to publish the next volume of the Cantos as soon as possible, in order to bolster Pound's reputation, although he had expressed private reservations that the most recent work was not of so high a standard as the rest.
Pound was not to escape lightly, however, and although he did not stand trial he was judged insane and spent the next eleven years in confinement.
Over those years Eliot would visit him during what became regular trips to the United States; he also wrote a number of letters to those in authority in order to ease his conditions: he talks about the time Pound should be allowed to spend alone, for example, and the condition of the buildings in which he was confined.
And, in concert with other friends, he worked patiently but assiduously for Pound's eventual release.
Unlike some of those friends, however, he did not attempt to force the pace and in this case at least his native caution was justified.
He always adopted a practical attitude in such affairs and, as Pound remarked after one of their conversations, "There is always a core of solid sense in Mr Eliot's talk" .
Although his trip to America in 1946 was partly of a business nature, that business could be combined with pleasure in meeting his "authors" , such as Auden and Djuna Barnes.
He took an almost paternal interest in them, and fretted about the fact that they did not lead as settled a life as they needed in order to work properly: he believed, for example, that Auden was wasting his talents.
Of course, he saw his old friends too, Emily Hale in particular , but his principal reason for making the journey was to visit his family.
He had not been with them since before the war and, as the youngest son, he saw his older brother and sisters passing away from him: Ada had died in 1943, and now Henry was seriously ill with  leukaemia.
Having once been the protected member of the family, it was now upon him that responsibilities began to fall.
The fact that he had been able to make the journey across the Atlantic meant that life was at last reverting to its customary shape.
There were great privations in post-war England, of course, and parcels of groceries and other rationed foods were dispatched to him by American friends well into the early Fifties.
But it was a sign that those wartime conditions which had so much restricted him were being lifted when, in October 1946, The Family Reunion was revived at the Mercury Theatre.
Martin Browne had suggested to him that he might like to revise certain scenes for this new production, but Eliot declined the opportunity — he did not want to tamper with the play, because he would have felt compelled to make further and extensive changes.
In any case, he was eager to start work upon another play and was trying to extricate himself from various official duties in order to give himself room for composition: he resigned from the board of the Christian News Letter, for example, on the grounds of lack of time.
The omens were good for another dramatic venture.
Not only had the reception of The Family Reunion been altogether more favourable than the ill-started attempt in 1939, but both this play and Murder in the Cathedral were to be performed at the first Edinburgh Festival in the following year.
Although he had planned to start serious work in the autumn of 1946, he was not able to do so.
Henry Eliot's condition had worsened, with a bout of pneumonia on top of his leukaemia, and in anticipation of another visit to America Eliot was trying to book his passage for spring 1947, although he was ready to fly out at once if there was a sudden crisis.
Only a small amount of money could be taken out of the country because of post-war restrictions and, as this was a personal rather than a business trip, he was forced to prepare lectures from which he could earn income while he was away.
To make matters worse, he was suffering from his usual bout of feverish colds and bronchial trouble during the late autumn and winter.
And then on 22 January 1947, Vivien Eliot died quite unexpectedly in Northumberland House; she was fifty-eight.
On her death certificate the causes were listed as "syncope" and "cardio-vascular degeneration" .
She had worn herself to death.
It was so sudden that even her doctors were taken by surprise, and to her husband the  news came as a profound shock.
She had died during the night, and it seems that Maurice Haigh-Wood telephoned Carlyle Mansions very early in the morning; John Hayward received the call, and then passed on the news to Eliot who, according to one friend, "buried his face in his hands, crying" Oh God!
Oh God!"
Vivien Eliot was buried in a cemetery in Pinner, Middlesex; her husband and her brother were among the few mourners.
Her life had been full of pain and perplexity; it is not too much to say that her emotional needs had been fastened on a man whom she never properly understood, and that he in turn was baffled and then enraged by her insistent and neurotic demands upon him.
And so it was that she died alone in a mental hospital — as Eliot told Violet Schiff, one of the few who had known them both from their earliest days together, death could only have been a deliverance for her.
He was, by one account, "shattered by grief and almost despair" after Vivien's death and, if it had not been for John Hayward's help and encouragement, would have retired into complete seclusion.
Ronald Duncan offered a perhaps apocryphal account of how lunch had been cancelled when Eliot sent a telegram explaining that he had to "bury a woman" .
When they did meet, Eliot was wearing a black tie but seemed "unusually relaxed during the meal, almost gay at times" .
These accounts are contradictory but not incompatible: it is probable that he was indeed in a state of shock, since the nature of shock is to suspend ordinary or familiar reactions.
The recognizable or permanent emotion comes after, and of that there is some evidence.
One friend said that, in later life, Eliot could never bear to mention Vivien's named and another has written of his feelings of "guilt and horror, which haunted him daily" and how once he observed, "I can never forget anything" .
During the period of his wife's death and funeral, he was ill again: his old feeling of "numbness" in reaction to unpleasant events once again returned.
He had a bad attack of bronchitis during February and was forced to spend ten days in hospital.
He had, in fact, been preparing for an operation to remove his hernia, which had been scheduled for the beginning of January, but because of his winter illnesses it was postponed until the summer.
He was altogether in a parlous state: the weather was bad, there was no water in the flat; he did not care to go out at nights and was seeing fewer people.
But there was no chance for him to rest in seclusion, even if he wished to do so — by  April his brother was dying, and because of the urgency of the situation Eliot flew to New York on 22 April.
Henry died twelve days later, and much of Eliot's time during the two months he stayed in the United States was spent in winding up his affairs.
But, as he had anticipated, he was forced to lecture in order to finance his stay there.
He had not had much time or energy to expend on such matters, and was quite happy to cover familiar, or at least already prepared, ground.
On 3 May he gave an address on Milton at the Frick Museum in New York, in which he recanted his previously low opinion of the poet, and on this occasion he seemed to one observer "incredibly refined, visibly aged" — he had given the same address two months before to the British Academy, and thus had saved himself additional effort.
On 23 May he read his poetry at the National Gallery in Washington, to an audience which included St John Perse, all the time "keeping behind horn-rimmed spectacles an almost unchanging expression" .
In June he lectured "On Poetry" at Concord Academy, in which he repeated his claim that the poet can never be a successful man.
His address was part of a graduation ceremony, and he walked on stage with school officials and local dignitaries; he dutifully applauded as each student received a diploma, although "One got the impression that it was an effort for him to look up" .
There were less important engagements as well: he had agreed to give a talk on behalf of the Episcopal Fellowship in Washington, but an announcement of his visit had appeared in the Washington Post and, much to his alarm, the little meeting hall was overflowing with people.
One member of the audience made notes of his extemporaneous address, in which he admitted that he was unprepared "for this specific situation or any situation in general" .
Eliot was "tall, gaunt, of pallid hue and tensely withdrawn from anything reminiscent of the flesh" .
He also received an honorary degree at Harvard University — it is a measure of his popularity, perhaps, that when he was at a reception there with E. M. Forster the students and teachers ignored the novelist and crowded around the poet.
Nevertheless, it had not been a happy visit.
He returned to England in the latter half of June and hardly had time to catch up with outstanding work before going into hospital in July to undergo the postponed operation upon his hernia.
He stayed in hospital for three-and-a-half weeks, and then spent several more convalescing in the country.
He returned to work in September but, in the  following month, was forced to have most of the remainder of his teeth extracted: he had now entered his sixtieth year, and was suffering some of the inconveniences of age.
There was no sense in which he "slowed down" , however, and in fact he compared himself to a travelling Sherlock Holmes.
He was preparing himself for a British Council tour of France but it was cancelled at the last moment; he did, however, fly to Amsterdam and then on to Rome in December under the auspices of the same organization.
He met poets like Ungharetti and Montale, and had an audience with Pope Pius XII — the Pontiff spoke to him on the theme of poetry and religion, although Eliot knew quite enough about that subject already.
Pius XII also blessed a rosary and gave it to him — when he returned to London, he placed it on his mantelpiece with other memorabilia.
He had been too rushed and busy in Rome to enjoy his stay there, although it seems that the American writer, Frederic Prokosch, persuaded him to go on a pilgrimage one afternoon to find the legendary "Golden Bough" on the shores of Lake Nemi; what they found was an old and dilapidated oak.
 "Never mind," said Eliot, "It has been a pleasant little journey." 
It had also been a difficult and painful year.
When he was asked by the BBC in November to broadcast a "personal anthology" of poems, he chose those, he said, which had remained in his memory for reasons which were mysterious to him: John Dryden's "To the Memory of Mr Oldham, Samuel Johnson's" On the Death of Dr. Robert Levet ", Rudyard Kipling's" Danny Deever ", Edgar Allan Poe's" For Annie "and the six lines from Shelley which begin" Art thou pale for weariness.
These are haunting and elegiac poems, in which expressions of sorrow and loss are given ceremonious form.
They recall the occasion when, as a boy, he had read in an epigraph two lines from Henry King's "Exequy" — and how he could not rest until he had found and read the poem entire.
He was drawn to such slow, mournful music and he carried it with him everywhere.
It had been such an unsettled year altogether that he had had no opportunity for connected work of anything other than a temporary kind; at the beginning of November, faced with the prospect of the British Council tours to France and Italy, he did not believe that he would be able to begin serious composition until the new year.
There were two projects on his mind: one was the little prose book  which had been "clogging his system" , to employ another of his own phrases, since the mid-Forties, and the other was the new play which had been postponed effectively since 1939.
He had been eager to start work upon the latter ever since the completion, and relative failure, of The Family Reunion — if only to correct the overt poeticizing and the unbalanced structure which he discerned in that drama.
But since it was his habit to ease his mind of the burden of one job before taking on another, his first task was to finish the prose book.
He had probably looked over the preparatory material which had already been published elsewhere, and sketched out the remaining chapters, during his period of convalescence in the late summer and autumn of 1947.
He must have been working on it in January 1948 at the latest, since the book was sent to the printers in the second week of February.
Certainly by 25 January he was discussing the prospect of a new play with Martin Browne, which he hoped to begin within two or three weeks.
Browne had tentatively suggested the summer of that year as the "deadline" for it, but Eliot was uncertain how quickly he could recover his dramatic skills and, since he often needed to work slowly, he believed the spring of 1949 to be a more appropriate date.Throughout the spring and summer of 1948 he worked on it as consistently as he could, although there were egregious interruptions: in April, for example, he had to make the British Council trip to Aix-en-Provence which had been postponed the previous winter.
Here he drank pastis with the mayors of the Basses-Alpes, and even found time to lecture on Edgar Allan Poe, although his new false teeth made it difficult for him to speak French.
By June, however, he had sent the first draft of three scenes to Browne and asked him if it was worth continuing.
Browne affirmed that it was, and in July Eliot sent a draft of the first three acts; he had entitled the as yet incomplete play "One-Eyed Reilly" but in a postscript explained that he had decided to change it to The Cocktail Party.
He wanted to emphasize the new play's connection with The Family Reunion: once again he was to deal with characters who live in a worn-out society, and have lost their way.
In August he joined the Fabers on holiday in Sussex, but he still wanted to complete a rough version of the whole play by late summer.
Browne would then have time to look at it, before Eliot embarked for America in late September.
He had been invited to become a visiting fellow at the Institute for Advanced Studies in Princeton: he  would, in other words, have plenty of time on his hands and would there be able to consider Browne's suggestions.
In fact he was still working on a first version of the fourth act (which eventually became Act III) when he sailed for New York on 24 September.
He noted with satisfaction that he would be in mid-Atlantic on his sixtieth birthday:an apt metaphor, perhaps, for his own condition.
He contracted a feverish cold on the boat, however, and after he arrived in New York at the beginning of October he went into virtual seclusion at the home of McKnight Kauffer and Marion Dorn before going on to Princeton.
The Institute itself was a place where men of proven ability (most of them elderly) were paid to continue their work.
He stayed in a small colonial-style house, and was given an office where he could pursue his own tasks undisturbed.
Lunch was provided in a cafeteria and tea in a common room — an environment which sounds uncomfortably similar to that of more youthful days, and in fact he signed himself in one letter as "Advanced Student" .
At first, as always, he felt lonely and homesick; he suffered from the fate of many famous men: according to one observer, most people were afraid to talk to him and he ate dinner alone at the Nassau Club.
But Princeton seemed more agreeable than most university towns"and after he had met some old friends, like the Maritains and the Niebuhrs, he began to relax.
After a while, too, some of the more literary residents of Princeton plucked up the courage to speak to him.
Eileen Simpson, who was then married to the poet John Berryman, was introduced to him and recalled his elaborate courteousness: "His manner was as formal as his dress…
On being introduced he made an effort not to avert his eyes, as one felt he would have done as a young man.
Instead he faced one directly, and took a moment longer over the exchange of greetings than was usual even with people whose graciousness is studied".
She also noticed that he drank five martinis, although they had no noticeable effect upon him.
While he was staying at Princeton he went down to Washington — he had to give a lecture at the Library of Congress, and wanted to see his cousin, Martha, there as well as Ezra Pound; he also made two or three trips to Cambridge to visit his family.
Work on The Cocktail Party was proceeding, however, as he incorporated some of Browne's suggestions and revisions — Browne believed the play to contain too much argument, hypothesis, generalized philosophical reflection  Eliot's main task, then, was to bring it more fully alive in terms of character and action, in order to avoid the mistakes of The Family Reunion.
In his office he had a blackboard, on which he transcribed diagrammatic models of the action, with letters of the ordinary alphabet for characters already invented and letters of the Greek alphabet for those whom he might need to invent; he was contemplating a further six months of composition.
But he was informed in November, while still at Princeton, that he had won the Nobel Prize for Literature.
For some time he had ignored rumours to that effect but now, he told reporters, he was "immensely pleased" .
This was indeed his year for honours since in January he had been awarded the Order of Merit by George VI; some have said that this gratified him more than the Nobel, and certainly he seemed to enjoy wearing the medal and ribbon on ceremonial occasions.
This may, however, have simply been part of his lifelong preoccupation with correct dress: one friend remarked that his clothes were English, his underclothes American."
He left Princeton at the end of November, having decided to cancel his sailing and fly back to London before attending the Nobel ceremonies in Stockholm.
He was the sixth Briton to receive the award — Kipling, Tagore, Yeats, Shaw and Galsworthy were his predecessors.
Before he left America he told a reporter that"One seems to become a myth, a fabulous creature that doesn't exist.
One doesn't feel any different.
It isn't that you get any bigger to fit the world, the world gets smaller to fit you.
You remain exactly the same".
At a later interview he was asked for what the Nobel had been awarded; Eliot replied that he assumed it was for "the entire corpus" and the reporter asked, "When did you publish that?" 
He flew from London to Sweden at the beginning of December, and at the ceremony on 10 December he was described as "a leader and champion of a new period in the long history of the world's poetry" .
Then, at an after-dinner speech in the town hall of Stockholm, Eliot said that he had experienced on learning of the award,…all the normal emotions of exaltation and vanity…with enjoyment of the flattery, and exasperation at the inconvenience of being turned overnight into a public figure".
Apart from predictable duties, like that of sitting through a performance of The Family Reunion (a play for which he now had little affection), he was asked to crown the Swedish snow queen at the winter festival: he told Robert Giroux  that he had hoped this might be combined with the Nobel ceremony itself, so that he could wear ice-skates with his tails.
When he returned to London, Cyril Connolly gave a party to celebrate the prize and during the course of the evening Eliot sang "Under the bamboo tree" from Sweeney Agonistes.
The "drunken helot" , Arthur Waugh's description of the incomprehensible poet of thirty years before, now had good cause to drink.
Those who had known him from that earlier period, however, were less than enthusiastic about his elevation.
Both Lewis and Pound hoped that the Nobel would free him of that cautiousness which had smoothed his ascent.
Lewis was more bitter since he felt — as so many of his contemporaries did — that he had been forced all his life to live in Eliot's shadow.
He told one correspondent that Eliot owed his best poetry to Pound — he was convinced that there would eventually be a vogue in favour of Pound which would take the form of a reaction against Eliot (in that he was to be proved right).
In another letter, he described Eliot as sly, and the deliberate instigator of a "cult" around himself.
In fact Lewis took some pride in his severe, no-nonsense attitude towards Eliot — "He doesn't come in here disguised like Westminster Abbey!" he told one friend.
Eliot, however, was himself less than sanguine about his monumental reputation, and although he was pleased about the Nobel he was worried about its effects.
When John Berryman congratulated him after the news was first received in America, he replied,"The Nobel is a ticket to one's funeral.
No one has ever done anything after he got it", and he described the prize in the same terms to Geoffrey Faber.
There is a similar air of gloom in a conversation which Ronald Duncan has recorded; Duncan suggested that he might use some of the prize money to go abroad and escape from the London winter.
 "Where?" 
Eliot asked.
 "Spain or the West Indies?" 
Duncan suggested.
 "I couldn't bear the company." 
Part of his apparently subdued reaction to the Nobel no doubt sprang from a genuine lack of confidence in his ability to continue writing (it was not, for him, a novel feeling) but he also found it difficult in conversation to react to praise or flattery — like Coriolanus, he did not like to hear his "nothings monster'd" .
Although, as Robert Lowell remarked,"He knew how good he was.
It would come out, in flashes,"there were also many occasions when he evinced modesty or self-effacement.
In this year a collection of  essays in his honour was published (edited by Richard March and Tambimuttu), and he told Mary Hutchinson that he had not begun to read some of the contributions.
It was this casualness that led him, as Edmund Wilson reported, to be humorous in private about his own reputation, and "offhand and vague" about matters he had once taken seriously.
He had a habit, also, of putting disparaging comments like "coo!" and "double talk!" in the margins of his own published essays.
Edmund Wilson explained this behaviour by suggesting that within Eliot there were a number of different characters — there was an "idealist" as well as an "operator" , a serious man as well as a "scoundrel" — just as V. S. Pritchett had described him as "a company of actors inside one suit" .
There is truth in this but it is also likely that, in a period which Eliot considered to be one of cultural decay before the onset of "barbarism" , he was genuinely sceptical about the importance or permanence of his work.
Although he might on one level enjoy his fame and success, his own tendency to withdraw from the world turned such fame into a kind of game which he was happy to play but which he did not take altogether seriously.
It was only after his second marriage, when he was able to share his life with another human being, that he began to take any real satisfaction in his life's work.
Before this marriage, his own solitariness and his claustral Christianity made such an achievement seem partly unreal.
In November of this year, while he was still in America, Notes towards the Definition of Culture was published.
It was to be his last substantial prose work, the final fruit of the project which he had been contemplating since the middle of the Second World War.
Its somewhat sketchy character suggests, in fact, that his main purpose was simply to finish what he had begun rather than to give urgent or forceful expression to his views.
He takes the idea of "culture" and disassembles it into its constituent parts; he then goes on to argue, or assert, that it depends upon a class system, upon a variety of regionalism and upon the family.
Although he describes religion as the "incarnation" of a culture he does not fully elucidate the point — at this level of abstraction, elucidation is perhaps impossible — but goes on to discuss the relation of politics and education to this larger whole.
By the end of the book, "culture" has become a metaphor for some kind of Bradleyan unity to which we may aspire but which we  can never reach; idealism consorts oddly with Eliot's sociology, however, and it is not at all clear if "culture" is a neutral term used to describe the whole way of life of a people or if it is being employed as a diagnostic tool to evaluate the various standards and aspirations of a society.
He affirms once again his belief that "our period is one of decline" but then mutters his exequies in a curiously dispassionate manner, as if he were engaged in an intellectual exercise of no particular consequence.
The paradox is, of course, that this little book has achieved a fortuitous permanence because of Eliot's fame.
In fact he seemed to have lost interest in the book before he had completed it — the last two chapters are haphazardly constructed — and he padded it out with three radio talks on "The Unity of European Culture" which he had given two years before.
It was not a critical success: as Philip Mairet, to whom the book was dedicated, put it,"Nobody seemed to like this book very much.
It is decidedly astringent and has been described as "prim" .
Not that Eliot harboured any illusions about the efficacy of his work — although Notes…was selling well, he did not expect it to have much influence.
It was this constant strain of pessimism, both about his own writing and about the civilization of which he was a part, that Wyndham Lewis tried to evoke in a portrait of Eliot which he was painting in the spring of 1949 "The body slightly tilted," he explained,"…in resigned anticipation of the worst.
"
The Nobel had afforded only a temporary alleviation of this condition: indeed, the abbreviated stay in Princeton, the rush back to England, and the trip to Stockholm made him feel worse rather than better.
And, after his return to England at the beginning of the year, he was forced to catch up with all the work he had neglected.
There were letters to write, interviews to give, meetings with eminent writers whose work he might never have read or of whom he had no very high opinion, and of course the official round of duties: a speech at the Alliance Française on 19 January, and another at a lunch of the Anglo-Swedish society two weeks later.
In January also he had to speak at Pusey House in Oxford on "The Lambeth Conference and Education" , but one student's disappointment at his performance on this occasion suggests the strain and lack of preparedness which were forced on him during this period: "In questions Mr Eliot was most feeble and hesitant, humming and hawing much and throwing back the questions with" Is that not what I said? "or" Does it not  prove my point?"
This may be temporarily quashing but it does not satisfy…
"
And he was also very tired: when sitting to Wyndham lewis in the spring, he had a tendency to drowsiness and sometimes slumber.
The problem was that engagements like that at Pusey House were a distraction from what he considered to be his main business — that of finishing The Cocktail Party.
He calculated that he would be able to meet all his daily and official duties if he devoted his entire time to them, and abandoned any attempt at his own writing, but this he was determined not to do.
He had to find all the time he could to write the play, even if it meant neglecting other matters, not least because it would be his first composition since the award of the Nobel Prize.
He spent each morning working on it and was, in addition, trying to keep down his evening engagements to only two a week, seeing no one at all on Fridays and Saturdays.
He was working against time; he had promised Browne that he would complete the play by the summer, and already Browne had been negotiating with Rudolf Bing, the director of the Edinburgh Festival, to have The Cocktail Party performed as part of that year's event.
After certain difficulties with the manager of the Old Vic, who did not want to commit himself to the play on the basis of the bare outline which had been shown to him, Browne approached the theatrical impresario, Henry Sherek, and asked him if he would care to produce the play — with Browne as director — at Edinburgh.
Although Sherek saw only the drafts of the first two acts, he agreed at once to do so.
The first meeting between producer and playwright was not a success, however — Sherek found Eliot difficult and withdrawn; he had heard of his reputation as a "recluse" and noticed a look of "horrified distress" when he was introduced to the plump and ebullient Sherek.
There were in fact periods of awkwardness throughout their association — "What on earth can we do?" 
Eliot once muttered when they were left alone together, which Sherek took as a sign that he was uneasy in his company — but, over the next ten years and three dramas, the partnership proved a fruitful one.
Eliot had already told Browne that he could not promise to deliver the play until June at the earliest.
He worked on it consistently — drafts exist outlining the ideas of the play, as well as the mechanics of its production.
Under the scrutiny of Hayward and  Browne, he began to revise and concentrate his verse — after the problems with The Family Reunion, he wished to use only poetry which met the test of "strict dramatic utility" although at a later date he was to worry in case he had strayed too close to the drama of Frederick Lonsdale.
By May the play was almost complete — all that was necessary was the process of readjustment which would necessarily take place in consultation with director and actors.
Eliot had a bad attack of bronchitis in June, which forced him to stay in bed for a week, but in July his sister, Marian, and a niece arrived from America and he went with them to Suffolk for ten days — the first holiday he had been able to take all year.
At the beginning of August he returned to London in order to attend rehearsals.
At the first of these, according to Henry Sherek, he announced to the actors (among whom were Alec Guinness and Irene Worth), "I will now read the play to you to show how I want my lines spoken" : as a poet, he did not want his own "voice" to be lost.
He stayed at the back of the theatre, silent but smoking constantly and scribbling notes.
There was only one occasion when he intervened during the rehearsals, according to Irene Worth.
Lavinia and Edward, the only married couple in the play, are quarrelling (he had once again delineated the woes of marriage): "Eliot bolted up to the stage looking quite unsettled.
 "The wife," he insisted,"must be fierce.
Much more fierce.
The audience must understand that she is impossible"
Eliot, together with his sister and niece, travelled up to Edinburgh on 20 August.
He was nervous and unsettled before the opening, and suffered from chills and fever, but, in spite of his aversion to conventional "publicity" , he was persuaded to give interviews to the press, although he was never at his best on such occasions.
One extract may suggest the tone of his replies;"Question: Do you intend the play to be a criticism of society without form?
Answer: I intend to produce characters whose drawingroom behaviour was generally correct".
His fears of failure were unjustified, and the play was enthusiastically received.
Alec Guinness introduced him to the audience after the first night, although such was his nervousness that Sherek had to push him onto the stage and, when a photographer blew a flash bulb in his face just as he was about to speak, he muttered "Oh my God" .
The first night reception was sustained throughout the Edinburgh run of a week, and the  reviewers generally praised the play.
Eliot himself was delighted with the production.
The Cocktail Party has an elaborate, although not complicated, structure.
It opens with the eponymous party in progress; Edward Chamberlayne is the sole host since his wife, Lavinia, has suddenly and unaccountably left him.
He explains his situation to a mysterious guest, who promises to return his wife to him as long as he agrees to ask her no questions about where she has been (Eliot later located his source for this in Alcestis, although that is really only of importance to him).
The guest turns out to be Sir Henry Harcourt-Reilly, "a very great doctor" , who in a role half-priestly and half-analytical reconciles Edward and Lavinia even though their marriage has already been described by him as that of
A man who finds himself incapable of loving
And a woman who finds that no man can love her.
He also intervenes in the life of another guest at the party, Celia Coplestone, a young woman who comes to him filled with a sense "…of emptiness, of failure" .
Harcourt-Reilly takes her out of her conventional life, and leads her towards a spiritual quest and eventual martyrdom.
He is a "guardian" , one of three who in The Cocktail Party adopt a benign role in curing or assuaging human misery.
The play ends as another party is about to begin.
Here, as in The Family Reunion, the ordinary human world is presented as one of paltry illusion.
But since The Cocktail Party is on one level a comedy, this mundane life is delineated as a form of charade — one which only the enlightened, the "guardians" , know how to control.
The others are tormented by a sense of their own unreality — "What are we to talk about?" is one refrain and, when they do talk, they misunderstand and confuse each other.
 "Hell is oneself," Edward exclaims because he, like the others, cannot escape from the small circle of his selfhood.
Racine has entered the drawingroom, and these protagonists engage either in anguished self-revelation or in disillusioning judgments about each other.
It is a bleak and somewhat chilly world which Eliot has constructed, an effect emphasized by the dispassionate way in which human emotion and human suffering are described.
It has often been said that his characters are "puppets" of his grand design, but his own vision necessarily makes them so.
Since the significance of life is to be  found outside the claims of the usual world, the "ordinary" characters who inhabit that world are bound to seem unreal or flimsy.
But what of this other world, into which Celia Coplestone is dispatched and of which only the "guardians" have any inkling?
It is a world of "visions" and of "devils" , of "voices" and of "shadows" , and the fact that it is described throughout in vague and melodramatic terms suggests that it is fundamentally ill-suited to presentation in the kind of drama which Eliot wished to write.
This had been the problem with The Family Reunion as well, and it was one which he attempted to solve in his next play.
But he never did: the vision which can be intimated in his poetry could not be embodied upon the stage.
He continued to try, however.
When he was engaged in writing The Cocktail Party, he was asked how long he would devote himself to the theatre rather than to poetry; he replied, "Until I can convince people that I know how to write a popular play" .
There is an element of bravado here — having conquered the academic and "literary" worlds, he wanted to move on — but it suggests also the extraordinary and self-conscious determination with which he worked.
While writing The Cocktail Party he had admitted that he had no natural talent for dramatic composition and yet he laboured to acquire the necessary skills.
His idea of the "popular play" is important, since his devotion to the music hall and his belief that the poet can only be socially useful in the theatre spurred him on to achieve what was for him the unachievable: the plays bear all the marks of their deliberate and laborious composition.
He was working against the natural grain of his genius, and the fact that he went on to write two more plays suggests the triumph of will over natural capacity, of idea over sensibility.
Because of problems in finding a theatre in the West End, Henry Sherek had decided to take The Cocktail Party to New York rather than to London; this was a calculated gamble on Eliot's fame — to see, as it were, if the Nobel Prize would run on Broadway.
Eliot was at first furious with him about the decision.
There were various reasons for this, not least among them that the fame upon which Sherek was gambling had its disadvantages.
He was accustomed to conventional envy from some of his contemporaries (although it could still distress him — Joseph Chiari recalls him leaving a party in Edinburgh because of the atmosphere of jealousy which he sensed  there).
But abuse was another matter and he was extremely nervous about the treatment he was then receiving in America over the award of the Bollingen Prize to Ezra Pound.
Eliot had been on the jury of the Fellows of the Library of Congress which had, in February 1949, awarded the prize to Pound's Pisan Cantos as "the highest achievement of American poetry in 1948" .
Since Pound was in confinement, not legally a "traitor" but branded as a fascist and an anti-semite, this honour provoked controversy and anger among certain sections of the American public and press.
And although Eliot was only one member of a jury which included among others Robert Lowell, W. H. Auden, Conrad Aiken and Katherine Anne Porter, he was singled out for abuse: in fact, he seemed to receive more than Pound himself.
It was a perfect opportunity for some writers to express the resentment which they had harboured against him for many years, and he himself was convinced that such people detested him because he had acquired British citizenship.
The Saturday Review was particularly hostile, accusing him of anti-semitism and, among other things, of being "a disciple of Dr Jung" (an author whom he had never read).
Its attack was then enlarged into a general diatribe against the "intellectual neo-fascism" which Eliot had encouraged among American critics.
It suggested that "this rootless expatriate" be at once dropped from the jury of the Library of Congress.
The charge of anti-semitism, and implied neo-fascism, was particularly serious just four years after the war, and Eliot seems to have been thoroughly discomfited by the affair.
At first he thought of resigning from the jury but then decided not to do so.
He refused to give any interviews to the press about the matter and in September, three months before the opening of The Cocktail Party in New York, he asked Sherek to try to ensure that there would be no attempt to obstruct the production.
He hardly had time to dwell on such matters, however.
He had returned to London from Edinburgh in a state of exhaustion.
He was able to snatch one long weekend in the country, but almost at once he had to start work on the preparation of lectures for a three-week tour of Germany.
He left England on 27 October and two days later he lectured at Hamburg on "The Idea of a Christian Society" ; the tour, which he made with Arnold Toynbee, included visits to nine cities, but he complained later that not the least exhausting part of it had been the expectation from his hosts that lie was some kind  of oracle as well as a poet.
On his return on 19 November, he hardly had time to catch up with his unfinished business before he was off to Brussels to deliver yet another lecture.
But for once he had planned to escape the worst excesses of the English winter, and at the beginning of 1950 he embarked with the Fabers on a six-week cruise to South Africa: two weeks getting there, two weeks on the beach at St James near Cape Town, and two weeks back.
He left behind him at Faber and Faber a most efficient young secretary, Miss Valerie Fletcher, who had been appointed at the end of August.
She had become obsessed with Eliot and his work at the age of fourteen, after she had heard a recording of "The Journey of the Magi" : "It was extraordinary," she said later, "that I felt I just had to get to Tom, to work with him." 
After she left school she came to London from her home in Yorkshire in order to attend a secretarial college, but abandoned that and enrolled with a secretarial agency.
She spent a year working for the writer Charles Morgan, but all the time her real purpose was somehow to work with Eliot himself.
At last her opportunity arose when Collin Brooks, a friend of both Eliot and her own family, suggested that she apply for the post of Eliot's secretary which had fallen vacant.
At the interview, "he smoked hard and was obviously as nervous as I was." 
But she got the job, with consequences which neither she nor Eliot could then have foreseen.
The Public Man
1950–1956
Eliot had arrived in South Africa by the time The Cocktail Party opened in New York on 21 January 1950, at the Henry Miller Theatre.
There were none of the demonstrations or obstructions which he had feared, and in fact such was the success of the play that he was featured on the cover of Time magazine on 6 March.
His words, already being quoted in the pulpit, were also being used on Madison Avenue: an Esso advertisement in 1948 had had as its message "Time future contained in time past" .
A cartoon in the New York Times in April 1950 showed a sailor in a tattooing parlour, saying "I have in mind a couple of lines by T. S. Eliot" .
He was now a celebrity.
When he arrived in South Africa, a crowd was waiting at the dock to greet him, and on later visits to the United States he was besieged by autograph hunters and press photographers waiting for him after readings.
When he lectured at Harvard in this year, policemen had to control the crowds who came out to see him, and loudspeakers were set up for those who could not get into the auditorium.
Katherine Ann Porter has described how, at one New York party, the guests were "swarming" around him, grabbing him, patting him, owning him, trying to claw each other away from him".
Fame is a less brilliant commodity in England, but nevertheless he had to keep his address secret, to protect himself not only from letters and telephone calls but also from undesirable visitors who might arrive at Carlyle Mansions.
There seems to be a law in human behaviour that people, in the end, get what they want, and there can be little doubt that Eliot would not have acquired the eminence which he now enjoyed unless on one level he had sought it: he said, in an address delivered during this period, that "…things sometimes become possible if we want  them enough." 
Many observers noticed the force and weight of his presence; it might be called dedication, or ambition, or it might have been something below the level of consciousness which propelled him forward.
Nevertheless, if we examine the pattern of his life, it reveals a programmatic aspect, and the steeliness of his resolve is not to be doubted.
But there was also a sense in which he despised fame even as he obtained it, and when in this year he described Mark Twain as a man who wanted success or reputation and yet at the same time "resented their violation of his integrity" , there can be little doubt that once again he was expressing his own feelings through the agency of another's.
Already he was wondering if his fame meant that his writing had only a contemporary appeal and he complained that people now thought of him as a celebrity rather than as a poet.
In retrospect, of course, it is clear that his creative powers were beginning to wane and that his real work had been done.
But there was also a growing disaffection among the younger poets and critics: he had ceased to be a poet and had become an institution, and the only thing to do with an institution is to attempt to pull it down.
He was compared with Aristides the Just, and there were those who wished a similar fate for him.
One phrase was repeated as a joke, "The Blessed Thomas Eliot Considered as the Air We Breathe" ; in the Fifties and Sixties there would be many attempts to dispel that air and to "place" Eliot as some great, dim figure from the past.
He was a relatively wealthy man; his annual income, from both his publishing salary and his royalties, was approximately £4,000, and in the early months of this year his income from the New York production of The Cocktail Party was estimated at about £570 per week: this was no doubt why, in June, he was looking for an accountant.
(At his death, he left £105,272.)
Wealth did not make him lavish, however; he had always been careful about money — indeed, he was economical in all areas of life, even in small matters such as ensuring that all the tea in a tea-pot had actually been drunk — and Joseph Chiari has remembered how he kept a regular account of his expenses in a pocket notebook.
One friend has explained how, in a conversation in which she was lamenting the cost of electricity, Eliot asked her in a confidential manner, "Are you on the domestic tariff?" 
He was nothing if not practical in his dealings with the world — he insisted on proper fees for the republication of his  essays, for example, and used to advise friends like Herbert Read on the amount they should charge for a lecture tour.
But if he was scrupulously careful about his own expenditure, he was generous to other poets and writers.
He underwrote a loss of £1,500 on Ronald Duncan's play, Stratton, but only on condition that Duncan was not told.
And when in 1949 Wyndham Lewis completed his portrait of him, Eliot quietly paid Lewis £50 more than the agreed price.
(He later made it clear that he did not wish the letters revealing his generosity to be published.)
Then in the following year he gave Lewis £200, to finance a trip to Sweden where he was to receive X-ray treatment for his deteriorating eyesight.
His secrecy abut his own generosity makes it very difficult to document in full; certainly, during the years of the Second World War, he gave money to Dylan Thomas and Roy Campbell, but many other such instances may have gone unrecorded.
After a spring and summer during which he was so busy with his ordinary duties that he had no time to himself at all— not even his evenings — he returned again to America in the late autumn of 1950.
These trips to the United States were to become a regular event, part of his routine as it were, and there was a sense in which he was returning home.
He spent one night in New York and then, nursing a cold which he had contracted on the boat, he went straight to Boston — with his relatives, in particular his two sisters and his late brother's family, and with old friends like Emily Hale and Djuna Barnes, he could still enjoy an affectionate intimacy which he seemed to lack in England.
Willa Muir saw him in America and observed,"Tom Eliot is much more human here than in England.
He was less cautious, smiling more easily, spontaneous in repartee, enjoying the teasing he was getting from Djuna…
In her company he seemed to have shed some English drilling and become more American."
And yet even to his relatives he must have seemed still in part a "foreigner" , with his accent and his clothes; that was an aspect of his loneliness, never to be completely at home anywhere.
In a preface to The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, published in this year, he described the landscape of his childhood and speculated about the boy who remained within the adult and successful figure of Mark Twain — the boy who was called "Huck" and whom Eliot saw as a symbol of freedom like the Mississippi  itself; it was impossible for that boy r that river "to have a beginning or end — a career" .
In America, and in his memories of a life still to be wished for although lost and gone for ever, that boy could be glimpsed in Eliot also.
But he was still very much a public man, and to pay for his visit he had agreed to give a limited number of addresses and readings.
At the University of Chicago, he gave four lectures in November on "The Aims of Education" and in the same month talked on "Poetry and Drama" at Harvard.
At the beginning of the previous month, he had given a reading in New York where one observer described him as a "hot ticket" .
Lecturing was now easier for him than it once had been — he had, after all, accumulated a great deal of experience — but the readings of his own poetry frequently left him exhausted.
Robert Giroux has recalled how, in advance of such occasions, Eliot was as "nervous as a cat" but that, when he had begun, a "great calm" descended upon him.
He was now a very effective reader of his own work — his theatrical instincts were here most valuable and, as Edmund Wilson noted, he could communicate a feeling of intense excitement to his audiences.
The lectures which he delivered in America on this visit are not of crucial critical significance and, like other addresses of the same period, they are chiefly remarkable for the fact that he felt able to talk at some length about himself and his work — as if he realized that audiences came to see him, rather than hear anything he might care to say.
He described his childhood in America, his experiences as a teacher, his work as a publisher, his poetic development, and his progress in the drama.
He also admitted the faults in his writing — something which the Eliot of earlier years would never have been able to do, in public at least.
In his Chicago lectures, for example, he described how certain passages of Notes toward the Definition of Culture had been exposed as a "mass of contradictions" and, at the end, he also made a rueful disclaimer — "I am quite aware that I have been trying to persuade, although I may not be quite sure of what" .
In fact these lectures offered an elegant and lucid exposition of educational theories and assumptions (he had been exercised by this topic since the early forties) and although he failed to arrive at any conclusions he suggested that none could in any case be reached.
He told George Seferis that, in his prose writings, the need for honesty and clarity entailed the kind of elaborate elucidation which  audiences found dull; but this was now the manner that Eliot adopted, and it is possible to see the equivocations and hesitations of his later prose work as aspects of what was essentially a Socratic method of inquiry rather than an expression of caution or indecision.
When he returned to England in the middle of December, the winter again affected him; he contracted bronchitis ten days after his arrival and suffered a further three attacks during January 1951.
He stayed at home for part of that month, and his doctor advised him to restrict his engagements as much as possible.
He was well enough in February, however, to attend a poetry reading at the Institute of Contemporary Arts; but it was not a pleasant occasion.
Apparently without Eliot having been warned, the poet Emmanuel Litvinoff read a poem which attacked his attitude towards the Jews.
At the end of the reading there was some consternation but Eliot, who was sitting at the back of the room, was heard to mutter, "It's a good poem, it's a very good poem" .
The incident was reported in the press, however, and his secretary was quoted in one newspaper as saying,"Many Jewish people have written to him accusing him of anti-semitism.
It is not true".
Since it is the charge still most frequently levelled against him, it is perhaps worth examining the evidence for it.
In his published writings there are two egregious instances: the line "The Jew is underneath the lot," in "Burbank with a Baedeker: Bleistein with a Cigar" and the reference to the undesirability of a large number of "free-thinking Jews" in After Strange Gods.
In his unpublished correspondence there are four references.
On two occasions he used the word "Jew" as a pejorative adjective — once in a letter to John Quinn, dated 12 March 1923, and once in a letter to Ezra Pound, dated 31 October 1917.
In a letter to Herbert Read, dated "16 February" (probably written in 1925) he described a racial prejudice from which he was not immune — although he did not specify that prejudice, its nature is clear from the context, in which he offered Disraeli as an example of what he meant.
Finally in a letter to Bonamy Dobrée — dated by Dobrée "about March 1929" — he made a number of supercilious remarks about the Jews.
All the available evidence suggests, then, that on occasions he made what were then fashionably anti-semitic remarks to his close friends.
Leonard  Woolf, himself a Jew, has said,"I think T. S. Eliot was slightly anti-semitic in the sort of vague way which is not uncommon.
He would have denied it quite genuinely", which suggests Eliot's ability to seem quite different to different people.
But there is one further distinction which needs to be made.
He was drawn to the traditions of Sephardism, he had once explained; that rigorous and secluded tradition appealed to his own sensibility, in the same way that "free-thinking" Jews seemed to him to come too close to the rational Unitarianism which he despised.
On a less theoretical level, it is also true that his expressions of anti-semitism occur in the Twenties or just before, when he was inclined to make misogynistic remarks also; it was a period when his own personality threatened to break apart, and it seems likely that his distrust of Jews and women was the sign of an uneasy and vulnerable temperament in which aggression and insecurity were compounded.
This is an explanation, however, and not a justification.
At the end of February, he was admitted to the London Clinic for an operation to remove piles.
He came out of the clinic on 19 March having stayed there for a week longer than he had anticipated, and was once again forced to rest.
He took a walk each morning, and went to bed between lunch and tea.
It was a most painful period altogether, and Ronald Duncan has described how Eliot, on his return from hospital, recounted in vivid detail the operation and its consequences.
Duncan said that, like Luther, he had a "gut obsession" : "Whatever you do, Ronnie," he told him, "avoid piles." 
But he recuperated steadily, and at the beginning of April he travelled to Granada for a month's vacation.
He was not entirely happy there, however — he complained to some friends afterwards that dinner was served very late in Spain — and returned to London on 7 May with a sore throat, cold and catarrh.
These illnesses — bronchitis and then emphysema being the most prominent — recurred throughout the Fifties and were provoked by a number of causes, not the least of which was the fact that Eliot was still a heavy smoker.
He did apparently display signs of hypochondria, however — Herbert Read remembered how he was "addicted to pills and potions" and, according to another friend, he kept a variety of pills in his lower waistcoat pocket — but hypochondria, if such it was, was only one aspect of a larger nervous disposition.
By this period he was seriously addicted to the tranquillizer, nembutal, and there seem to  have been a number of objects to which he attached his fears — lifts and large animals among them.
He was often nervous before meeting strangers, which was why at receptions, for example, he found the company of a friend like Mary Trevelyan so reassuring.
He was anxious about travelling, and worried that he might miss his train or enter by accident the wrong one: this was a fear that seems to have lingered since his youth when, as he said,"I found a variety of calamities to worry about.
And I haven't changed".
Many years before he had described, as we have seen the acute but generalized sense of apprehension which invaded him at times of stress or exhaustion and one recognizes in his temperament a permanent sense of impending doom and disaster — as if the world were always threatening to fall in upon him.
One reporter who came to interview him in this period noticed how he looked as if he might collapse from "lack of nourishment, insomnia and fatigue" , and an acquaintance described him thus: "His face was pale as baker's bread…he smoked and between exhalations he hacked a dry, deathly smoker's hack Eliot was cadaverous." 
But there is no doubt that personal unhappiness contributed to his ill health.
E. W. F. Tomlin has recalled his "stricken" look and the occasion when he inquired,"How does one set about dying?
"
When he was told of a young man who wished to become a poet, Eliot replied, "He's getting ready for a sad life" , and Ronald Duncan said that during this period he looked "miserable and unwell" and "began to affect many signs of premature old age" .
Duncan's account is, in fact, a not unsympathetic one of Eliot punishing himself, denying himself the small pleasures or luxuries which someone of his wealth and distinction could have enjoyed: "He always took his wine flavoured with guilt" .
Certainly the picture of him during this period is of a man haunted by guilt and remorse; it seems that he felt he had no right to happiness, and the death of his wife had only served to convince him that he had done some irreparable harm to another human being, for which he must undergo a period of punishment.
In an address on Virgil which he gave in September of this year, he talked of certain men, like Aeneas, who are elected to a special destiny.
He suggested that Aeneas left Dido in obedience to his fate but he was not thereby relieved of feelings of shame or unhappiness — he felt "a worm" .
Such a destiny does not make life easier but rather "it is a very heavy cross  to bear" .
It is significant, perhaps, that he says "is" rather than was or "must be" .
There is clearly an element of dramatic self-consciousness here, just as there is in Duncan's account of his affecting the symptoms of old age — "he even started to cup his hands at remarks he could hear perfectly well" .
Ever since the Twenties, in fact, Eliot had manifested so many visible signs of melancholy and weariness that "poor Tom" had become the constant refrain of his friends.
But such stylized behaviour does not affect the genuineness of his pain during this period, or of the loneliness which it seemed to impose upon him.
After Mary de Rachewiltz, Ezra Pound's daughter, visited him in his gloomy study in Carlyle Mansions she wrote, "I had met a great man, and Loneliness" and one friend has remarked that "I knew he was intensely — even wretchedly — lonely" .
Of course, his own eminence contributed to his isolation, but he also chose solitude as his appropriate fate.
When in April 1949 Mary Trevelyan had written a letter in which she explained her feelings for him, and in fact suggested marriage, he explained in his reply that although he valued her friendship he was no longer capable of reciprocating such feelings for anyone.
And then, in the following year, prompted by his frequent descriptions of his own loneliness — his fear of becoming ill, his dislike of attending receptions alone — she again wrote to him in similar terms.
In a long letter, he then explained that his past affection for someone else (no doubt Emily Hale) rendered any new relationship impossible for him.
And so he hugged his loneliness to himself even as he bemoaned it.
Herbert Read, in a conversation with Stephen Spender during this period, suggested that Eliot was lacking in affection for "perhaps everyone" and that he wished "to slink away into some corner and die" .
Allen Tate remembered one luncheon when he was silent and "withdrawn into himself" .
And in a conversation with William Turner Levy, a young American who was about to become an Episcopalian minister, Eliot raised the possibility that he might eventually enter retirement in an abbey — such a life suited him, he said.
No doubt this seemed to be the natural course for him, since in that retreat he would complete the process which had begun with his conversion almost thirty years before.
Such solitariness was a condition and not a mood, however; it lay beneath those moments of inexplicable high spirits when Eliot  seemed, as Sherek put it, "as gay as a cricket" , just as it could be combined with apparent activity and "busyness" in the world.
When in May 1951 he returned from his holiday in Spain, for example, he had at once to prepare for three different public engagements in the following month — the first weekend was to be spent at Brighton for the annual meeting of the Alliance Française, occasions which he now found appallingly dull; then he was obliged to make a speech on behalf of the Cecil Houses Trust for old people, and give an address at Chichester Cathedral.
Quite apart from Faber business, he had to settle down and write prefaces for three books as well(one of them for his own selection of Pounds literary essays).
All of these activities meant that he could not get on with his new play, of which the first two scenes were already drafted and which he had planned, tentatively, to finish in time for the Edinburgh Festival of 1952.
He was able to get away for a two week holiday in Switzerland at the end of August, where he relaxed and swam in Lake Geneva: it was the one European country which he found not to have changed out of all recognition, and he took an annual holiday there.
He was involved in the same heavy round of duties as soon as he returned to London, however, and honorary positions were becoming increasingly a burden.
Just as he was about to travel to Paris in November, to open a book exhibition and make a speech at the Bibliothèque Nationale, he caught a heavy cold which turned to bronchitis with congestion of the lungs; a nurse was called in and he took a course of penicillin, but he still managed to make the journey.
He came back to England and seemed about to succumb to pneumonia but, ten days after his return, he went on another visit to Paris, on this occasion to receive an honorary degree from the University there.
He did not like the city now — in fact he used to say that he disliked any place he had known before 1914.
He was in France again in the spring of 1952, and this was followed by a trip to the United States and then one to Scotland.
He was now in his sixty-fourth year but, for all his ill health, he still had a surprisingly tough constitution — as tough as his will.
Throughout 1952 his major task was to finish the play which he had already begun.
He was dissatisfied, as always, with his previous work, and he had detected flaws in The Cocktail Party which he wished to remove from the new play.
The last act had been unsatisfactory and he wanted to provide a more effective resolution; he was also concerned that he might have gone too far in removing the "poetry" from his dramatic verse.
And so he set to work: despite the usual interruptions, by the end of the year he managed to complete drafts of two acts which he dispatched to Martin Browne.
The play could now be tentatively scheduled for the Edinburgh Festival of 1953, one year later than Eliot had originally planned.
Browne has noted that the early drafts he received, together with a synopsis of the action, already suggested the shape of the complete play — quite unlike the false starts and extensive rewriting which had been Eliot's procedure in his earlier work; Browne explained this in terms of his "greater self-confidence as a playwright" .
That self-confidence had been acquired from the success of The Cocktail Party: it had opened in London in May 1950, just a few months after the New York opening, and, although the audiences began to fall off in November, Sherek did not feel it necessary to close the play until February 1951.
But it was in the following year, 1952, that Eliot reached the largest audience he had known: The Cocktail Party was broadcast on television, and was watched by an estimated three-and-a-half million people.
He was not particularly pleased with the result, however: when The Family Reunion had been televised two years before, he confessed that it was the first television play he had seen and that he found the medium deficient.
"
He had even written a letter to The Times (one of his favourite pastimes), deprecating "The Television Habit" .
But he had become, in one sense, a "star" of both stage and screen since, the year before, Murder in the Cathedral had been released in its cinematic version.
He told the American writer, John Malcolm Brinnin, that he had learned, from working on the film production, more about writing for the theatre than he had learned in the theatre itself, but that did not prevent him from vetoing the idea, proposed by Sherek, that The Cocktail Party should also be filmed.
Similarly he rejected what was admittedly a bizarre offer to film "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock" — although it might have had its moments.
And so it was that Eliot was immersed in what he called ironically "show business" , and although he had reached an age where he performed his tasks more slowly, now more than ever his life was being conducted under pressure.
Throughout January he worked upon the third act of the play and.
on doctor's orders as much as anything else, he restricted his evening engagements to the Tuesday  and Thursday of each week (those were now the evenings when his housekeeper was"off,).
But in February of this year a most unwelcome event claimed his attention.
In the July 1952 issue of Essays in Criticism a young academic, John Peter, offered "A New Interpretation of the Waste Land" , the gist of which he summarized thus: "At some previous time the speaker has fallen completely — perhaps the right word is irretrievably — in love.
The object of this love was a young man who soon afterwards met his death, it would seem by drowning."
The inference which might be drawn from this analysis was that Eliot himself had conceived a homosexual passion for just such a young man and, when the article was reprinted four years after Eliot's death, it was suggested to be Jean Verdenal, the Frenchman whom Eliot had met in Paris when he was a student there and to whom, after his death in the First World War, he dedicated Prufrock and Other Observations.
John Peter's analysis described the elements of sexual guilt and misogyny in the poem, and pointed to a variety of literary allusions to pederasty and sodomy.
In the past, Eliot's reaction to the multiple interpretations of The Waste Land had been one of benign neglect — it was his apparently settled belief that the author's interpretation of his work is no more pertinent than that of the reader.
On The Waste Land specifically, he told one inquirer that the real meaning of the poem is that which it holds for whoever is reading it.
His reaction to John Peter's interpretation was somewhat different, however.
He seems to have come across the article in the early weeks of 1953, since in February he threatened a libel action if copies of the offending issue were not immediately destroyed.
When John Peter, no doubt in a state of some alarm that his scholarship had provoked such a response, offered to publish a retraction, Eliot's solicitors wrote in March that their client considered it "neither necessary nor desirable" for any such retraction to appear; their client would take the very gravest view of any "further dissemination" of the article or its contents, which he had read "with amazement and disgust" .
Clearly, Eliot was seriously perturbed.
There have been other attempts to imply that he had homosexual tendencies.
Robert Sencourt's memoir contained a number of insinuations of this sort, and one academic study has traced the theme of homosexuality within Eliot's work.
The point generally  made in corroboration of this theory is that his poetry is marked by images of sterility and mechanical lust, and that the excised passages of The Waste Land which have now been published contain evidence of pervasive and sometimes bitter misogyny.
Certainly this is one aspect of the poetry he wrote during his marriage to Vivien, at least up to Ash-Wednesday, and also of the early poetry he wrote as a young man in Paris.
For a long period he seems to have been disturbed or disgusted by female sexuality, particularly as it was embodied in his wife, and to have established relationships with women in which the dominant note was one of camaraderie not unmixed with his desire for comfort or protection.
But it would be the tritest form of reductionism to assume that Eliot, because he could not adequately deal with female sexuality, was therefore homosexual.
The essential point is that sexuality as such disturbed him — even in his early letters to Conrad Aiken we see his sexual impulses towards women engaged in an unequal struggle with his own need for self-possession (or self-preservation) and control.
These letters themselves, with their references to women and his dependence upon them, should be taken with the facts of his first impulsive marriage and his second happy one: all the available evidence suggests that when he allowed his sexuality free access, when he was not struggling with his own demons, it was of a heterosexual kind.
The suggestions of homosexuality are, however, only one aspect of the attempt to discover some "mystery" which he wished to conceal; and, in fact, the belief that there is such a secret has been largely provoked by the innate secretiveness of his own temperament.
The paradox is that his sometimes self-dramatizing manner, both in his life and in his work, has provoked the interest and curiosity which apparently he wished to forestall.
The fact that he forbade an official biography — as early as 1925, he had decided that he did not want one — has suggested to many people that such a biography would necessarily be of a scandalous nature.
We expect to find a guilty incident or relationship because he writes continually of guilt; we expect to find sin because he speaks of atonement and expiation.
His own horror of self-revelation has led to the assumption that there are such revelations to be made.
This obscures the true nature of Eliot's life, just as it diminishes his poetry.
By the end of February 1953, the third act of the new play, which Eliot had entitled The Confidential Clerk, was ready for typing.
The casting was completed by May and rehearsals were scheduled for July.
Before they were due to begin, Eliot travelled once again to America — first to his birthplace St Louis, where a heatwave affected him disagreeably, and then on to Cambridge where he spent two weeks with his relatives before travelling to Connecticut and New York.
As always, he felt it necessary because of exchange controls to earn money while he was there and, while at St Louis in the beginning of June, he gave an address at Washington University on "American Language and American Literature" (he received a doctorate on this occasion, as on so many others).
When he had started to prepare his notes for this occasion, he was overwhelmed by private memories: St Louis was the place of his birth, and Washington University itself owed its foundation to his grandfather; and when in the lecture he spoke of the characteristics of a national literature, and American literature in particular, as "a strong local flavour combined with an unconscious universality" it is clear to what locale he belongs.
In a later interview he was to say of his poetry that "…in its sources, in its emotional springs, it comes from America" .
The wheel has come full circle.
These were confessions he could not make earlier, when the disavowal of his origins and his deliberate acquisition of Englishness helped to form the remarkable character with which he confronted the world.
Now there was no need for such disguises.
As soon as he returned to England in mid-July, he became involved in preparations for the play.
He had great hopes for it, and told an American friend that he thought it his best to date.
Rehearsals started on 27 July, and Martin Browne had taken the precaution of advising the cast not to ask the author to elucidate any of the dialogue; one actress disregarded the advice and asked Eliot what one of her lines meant.
 "My dear child, don't ask me," he replied, "I don't know!" .
At the end of the fourth week the players moved to Edinburgh where The Confidential Clerk was to open at the Lyceum on 25 August.
There was, of course, now a great deal more interest in Eliot than in the play, but he had stipulated in advance that he was not to be subjected to any form of publicity: no press conferences, no interviews, no speeches; as a result, he was much more relaxed at the first night and was even able to laugh at his  own jokes.
The reaction of the audience was enthusiastic, and the play continued to be a popular success after it had opened at the Lyric Theatre in London on 16 September,(Henry Sherek had again wanted to take the play first to New York, but Eliot vetoed the idea).
The critics were less sure, however, and there were some doubts whether he had been able to combine his apparent religious intentions with the format of a conventional Shaftesbury Avenue entertainment.
He himself thought The Confidential Clerk to be his most profound play, but it is difficult now to see this.
Its central theme concerns a young man, Colby Simpkins, who has entered the service of Sir Claude Mulhammer as a "confidential clerk" ; Mulhammer in fact believes Colby to be his illegitimate son, raised by a Mrs Guzzard in Teddington, but his paternity is thrown in doubt when Sir Claude's wife, Lady Elizabeth Mulhammer, claims Colby as her own illegitimate son who had also been dispatched to Mrs Guzzard.
Clearly only Mrs Guzzard can resolve the mystery, and arrives on stage to reveal that Colby is her own son and that his father, like Colby himself, was a "disappointed musician" .
At once Colby makes plans to become an organist in a small church in the strikingly named district of "Joshua Park" outside London.
This is greatly to simplify an already schematic plot, but the pattern of action is clear enough: it is essentially a comedy of identity, in the manner of late Victorian melodrama, upon which Eliot has grafted his characteristic exposition of the religious sensibility.
Colby Simpkins is one of the elect, above familial ties or mundane circumstances, like Harry in The Family Reunion and Celia in The Cocktail Party — although Eliot has on this occasion eschewed the Furies or martyrdom as a way of emphasizing Colby's difference from those who are content with a secular existence.
His essential vision remains the same, however: in a world which is unreal, inhabited by foolish or isolated people, only those with an especial destiny can escape its constrictions.
But the Confidential Clerk is also self-consciously theatrical, complete with exits, entrances and sudden recognitions.
Eliot had already discussed the possibility of introducing more poetry into his drama, after the rigorous starkness of The Cocktail Party, but once more in this play his reliance upon form and formal manipulation has taken precedence.
The major difficulty with The Confidential Clerk, however, is that its techniques of stage action are so  thoroughly and obviously conventional that anything Eliot cares to place within them is diminished.
At best, it is a tour de force , a piece of self-conscious "theatre" manipulated for his own purpose.
But he had wished for more than that.
In an interview which he gave in this year, he expressed his disappointment at the recent development of English poetry and suggested that any "creative advance" would come in prose fiction or in poetic drama: this is clearly what he himself was aiming at, as if he felt he could achieve in drama what he had already achieved in poetry.
Certainly the ambition was in both cases the same: in a lecture which he gave soon after finishing The Cocktail Party he declared that he only wished to write plays "of contemporary life" .
As a young man, it had been his recognition of the need for contemporary diction and contemporary imagery in poetry that had drawn him to sources as disparate as Baudelaire and John Davidson.
But in spite of the insistent use of demotic speech in The Confidential Clerk, the very quality which seems to be missing from it is contemporaneity — it is worth remembering, in contrast, that John Osborne's Look Back in Anger was produced only three years later.
In his social criticism Eliot assumes an idea of England which never existed and proposes an England which could not exist: in the same way, his own vision of the world was too singular for him to be able to invest his social dramas with the emblematic or representative significance to which he aspired.
His was too literary, and now too deliberate, a talent to flourish in the public realm of the theatre.
Perhaps he guessed as much: certainly he seems to have been surprised by the success of the play.s But that success was more or less assured: his reputation and authority were such that those who went to the theatre went, as a matter of course, to see Eliot.
When Edmund Wilson attended a performance of The Confidential Clerk, however, he found it "rudimentary" ; everyone in London seemed to agree with him but, he said, "respect for Eliot had made it impossible for anyone to commit himself by printing a sincere opinion" .
It is possible, then, that Eliot no longer knew what others really thought of his work.
A few weeks after the opening of the play, he once more began to suffer from bronchitis.
In November he was able to lecture at Central Hall, Westminster, on "The Three Voices of Poetry" — in the recording of that address, his clipped and precise speech, almost professorial in character, can be heard — but it was to be his last  major engagement for many months.
He had been urged by his doctor to escape the English winter and at the end of the year he went once more to South Africa for a ten-week holiday, sailing to Durban and then proceeding in a leisurely fashion to Cape Town.
Although this cruise was to be in the nature of a "rest cure" , almost immediately after his return in early March 1954, he suffered an attack of tachycardia, marked by an acceleration of the pulse.
He went into the London Clinic for three weeks and after X-rays, blood tests and cardiographic treatment it was discovered that the disorder had no organic origin — its source was essentially a nervous one and seemed likely to have been the result of over-exertion and worry.
There was a risk that he might overstrain and enlarge his heart: he told one visitor that the sensation was like that of "harbouring some runaway machine" .
But his pulse returned to normal by the end of April, and at the beginning of May he returned home to Carlyle Mansions.
He was told by his doctor to cancel all engagements for two months, and was ordered to give up smoking; he was allowed, instead, one cigar a day.
He had, of course, given up cigarettes by the time he had gone into the clinic, but as a result he had abandoned the puritanical principles inculcated into him in youth and had started eating sweets instead; and this meant that he was putting on weight.
He had been a heavy smoker all his life, however, and for a while he still felt the need for a cigarette before and after meals.
In May he went to convalesce by the seaside, near Littlehampton, and on Ms return he stayed at home for another month, attempting only light work: all important social and public engagements were cancelled until the autumn.
Under this enforced regimen of quiet and rest, he came to understand that it was necessary for him to retire a little from the active life in which he had previously been engaged; he told William Turner Levy that he would have to learn to concentrate his time and energy upon his real work.
It was in a similarly reflective vein that he wrote to Marion Dorn later in the year.
Her husband (and his old friend) McKnight Kauffer, had just died and Eliot speculated about the question of "what might have been" in anyone's life — that crucial moment when a life is changed.
Perhaps he was contemplating his own life with Vivien here just as, when he connected McKnight Kauffer's death with a sense of "the void" , he was once again returning to his own feeling of emptiness  which had played so large a part in his religious conversion.
He had known "the void" himself and he knew, also, what it was not to love life.
As so often happens in the last years, his remaining family and oldest friends became of most importance to him.
His sister came to England in July, and they went to the Isle of Wight together for a little over three weeks.
Other American relatives came in August and then at the beginning of September he went to Switzerland again.
He returned to England in mid-September but then, to add to his physical woes, he suffered an attack of arthritis: it required massage and he resented the time he had to spend travelling to and from the masseur.
Time was now important to him: it had been a lazy year and, as he had told Levy, there was still work for him to do.
One of his last poems, "The Cultivation of Christmas Trees" , was published in the autumn as part of the Faber "Ariel" series: it is a poem in which the memories of childhood Christmases are kept alive through the experience of age and weariness, both the beginning and end of life coming together in the fear and love of God.
Although his general health seemed more stable after his long recuperation, he was finding it more and more difficult to keep up with his daily obligations, let alone those of a more public nature.
He had been awarded the Hanseatic-Goethe prize but was unable to make the trip to Germany in order to receive it, and even now was attempting to prepare an address for the following year.
But these things were not easy for him.
He had been asked to rewrite the words of The Rock, but he suggested to Ronald Duncan that he should do the job for him: "Watching the time he took to write even his signature," Duncan noted, "it occurred to me that it must be a painful process for him to compose anything" .
And George Seferis saw also, when Eliot was inscribing a book, "how nervously he grasped the pen" .
He was ill again with tachycardia in January 1955 and in the middle of the month returned to the London Clinic.
He came out after two weeks and — despite a slight chill on the liver — he was recovering by the end of February.
By March he was out again, and back at his office in Faber and Faber, although he was prudent enough to retire to bed early in the evening: with a complaint which had no organic cause, he could not be certain that he had been cured".
He flew to Hamburg at the beginning of May in order to attend the postponed ceremony for the Hanseatic-Goethe prize and  to give an address on "Goethe the Sage" .
His problems in composing this lecture were no doubt compounded by the fact that he had had in the past expressed no great liking for Goethe's poetry — "I can't stand his stuff," he had once told Ronald Duncan — and in any case he now found public addresses a complete waste of time.Immediately on his return from Germany, he travelled to the United States for a visit of two months.
His primary purpose was to see his two sisters in Boston — one was now too old to travel, and the other was ailing.
He had calculated, however, that he would need to give three poetry readings in order to cover his expenses on this visit: he did only the amount that was strictly necessary, since the Inland Revenue had a habit of taking much of any extra income he earned.
He stayed first in New York with Robert Giroux, and then went down to Washington partly in order to see Ezra Pound.
He did not enjoy such visits now, and would have been tempted to abandon them if it were not for the fact that people might gossip.
But although he found Pound's humourlessness and growing megalomania more and more distasteful, Eliot's activities on his behalf continued.
He wrote regularly to Dorothy Pound, and his advice was always of a most practical nature.
When in 1953 Wyndham Lewis suggested a further campaign to release Pound from confinement, Eliot at first advised against any precipitate step: a number of proposals were being considered — including a letter to President Eisenhower — but he was wary of doing anything from England without being sure that there was approval for such moves in America.
He was also unhappy about Pound's own obstinacy and arrogance in the matter of his eventual release; he was raising objections to schemes that seemed perfectly sound and, as Eliot told his daughter, "I fear your father does not want to accept freedom on any terms that are possible" .
Their relationship was further impaired when in 1954 Pound criticized Eliot's Christianity as "lousy" ; Eliot wrote a caustic letter back.
Their meeting in this year could have been chilly, then, but fortunately it was not: "Possum more relaxed this year," Pound wrote to Ernest Hemingway, "last year rather edgy…" 
On his return from America — with presents of nylons, and other goods still in short supply in England, for friends — he continued with his usual round of private and business engagements.
In August he went again to Switzerland, and for a week in September he looked  after his grandniece who had travelled to London to see him; but then he contracted athlete's foot and had once again to enter a nursing home.
He expected to be there for only three or four days, but he was kept in for a fortnight.
It was a miserable time; the winter proved too much for him, and at the beginning of 1956 he had a severe attack of bronchitis: his coughing and choking were so bad that it induced his tachycardia.
He went back into hospital and stayed there for five weeks.
He was now very weak and was forced to convalesce until March — after that, his doctor advised him, he would be able only to engage in part-time office work.
By April he had recovered sufficiently to travel to America once more, to see his sisters; this visit is perhaps most remarkable for the fact that he addressed the largest assembly ever gathered to attend a literary lecture (he also received what was then the largest fee for such an event, some two thousand dollars).
On 30 April at the University of Minnesota, in Minneapolis, 14,000 people gathered in a baseball stadium to hear Eliot discourse on "The Frontiers of Criticism" : "I felt," he said, "like a very small bull walking into an enormous arena." 
He spoke on the transformation of literary criticism over the previous thirty years and, no doubt with the memory of John Peter's interpretation of The Waste Land in mind, warned against too much psychological or biographical conjecture in the explication of poetry.
But the subject of his lecture was not the reason so many thousands of young Americans had crowded into the stadium: they had come to see him.
He had become a kind of totem; his extraordinary authority was based on that.
sense of a cultural order which he had once sought and which, by the strange alchemy of his career, he now embodied.
He had become the representative of a tradition which, without his presence, might finally disappear, and the fact that he now had very little left to say only heightened the almost ritualistic sense of occasion which that presence provided.
He stayed with his relatives from the middle of May into June.
Although his sister was now gravely ill he had to return to London but, on the voyage back, he was again afflicted with tachycardia and when the ship docked at Southampton he was rushed to hospital in London; while recovering there, he learned that his sister had died.
Eliot himself was now in his sixty-eighth year.
There remained one last work for him to complete; already he had begun writing a play  which was to concern a successful public man who, at the end of his life, is waiting for death.
He had drafted two acts by January of this year, when ill health forestalled his plans to do further work upon it.
But in August, just before setting off for a month in Switzerland, he still hoped to have finished a draft of the third act by the end of the year.
There were other, smaller tasks which he wished to complete: when he had finished the play, he planned to revise for publication the lectures which he had given on education at the University of Chicago.
It was an exhausting schedule, and he was not able in the end to maintain it.
He returned from a cold and rainy holiday in Switzerland to find himself faced with a mountain of correspondence and other business (he was receiving in this period something like fifty letters a day, although most of them were handled by Valerie Fletcher).
He still tired easily, and disliked evening engagements.
Igor Stravinsky met him for the first time in this year, and recalled how shy he seemed.
Conversation was not easy: "Eliot turned his head from speaker to speaker, with a slight jerk, emitting a nervous tic" yes "or" hmm"every few seconds.
You felt he was registering unfavourable impressions".
In the winter of 1956, he was further irritated by problems with his teeth: he was about to have X-rays for the three which remained to him.
But personal troubles, he told Bonamy Dobrée, seemed trivial in comparison with public matters — by which no doubt he meant the Soviet invasion of Hungary.
Nevertheless there was one event of this year which seemed to lift such worries front him, and to help cure all his infirmities except that of age.
Happy at Last 
1957–1965
Towards the end of 1956 Eliot proposed to Valerie Fletcher, almost eight years after she had started working for him.
The restrictions of office life might have formed a permanent barrier to any expression of their feelings for each other, but their relationship had grown appreciably closer when they had both stayed for part of one summer at the home of a friend, Margaret Behrens, in Mentone — although even here Valerie Fletcher still called him "Mr Eliot" .
He proposed to her at the offices of Faber and Faber; after she had accepted, he explained that he would have asked her much sooner if he had known her real feelings towards him, but she had been so formal with him that he was not even sure if she liked him — which, after eight years, suggests an odd insecurity or impercipience.
She was nervous that he might change his mind at the last minute, but he did not do so.
On 10 January 1957, at 6.15 in the morning when it was still dark, they were married at St Barnabas's Church in Addison Road, Kensington: she was thirty, and he now sixty-eight.
The church had been chosen simply because its priest happened to be a friend of Eliot's solicitor, who was also "best man" .
Hardly anyone knew of the ceremony in advance: no banns were posted and no friends (except, perhaps, John Hayward) were informed.
The only other witnesses present were Miss Fletcher's parents.
Once again Eliot sought secrecy at one of the most important events of his life, although on this occasion his primary aim was to avoid the attentions of the newspapers.
Quite by chance, he discovered just before the ceremony that Jules Laforgue, who had exercised such a decisive influence on his youthful poetry, had also been married at St Barnabas's.
After the wedding, they were taken for breakfast to the house of the officiating priest which by curious coincidence  happened to be to Kensington Church Walk, where Ezra Pound had lived many years before.
Past and present seemed to be animating each other in almost an Eliotic manner.
The marriage had come as a complete shock even to Eliot's closest friends, such as Emily Hale and Mary Trevelyan.
Indeed it would not be too much to say that neither woman ever really got over it; a day before the wedding he had written to Mary Trevelyan, expressing the hope that she would remain on friendly terms both with him and his new wife, but the old intimacy had necessarily gone for ever.
It vanished, too, from the friendship between Eliot and John Hayward.
It is a matter of dispute how they parted; friends of Hayward suggest that Eliot left Carlyle Mansions on the morning of the marriage, leaving only a note of explanation behind — or, even, that he told Hayward as the taxi waited for him in the street below.
Friends of Eliot suggest that he confronted his old friend with the news a day or two before the marriage.
Whatever the exact circumstances, it is at least clear that Eliot vacated Carlyle Mansions quickly and deliberately — and that he left behind him a man to whom he had been a companion for ten years.
There can be little doubt that Hayward had come to rely upon him over that period, and felt in some sense that he had been abandoned.
In spite of the strangeness of Eliot's behaviour, however, few people begrudged him the happiness which in personal relations he had never experienced before: "He obviously needed to have a happy marriage," Valerie Eliot said on a later occasion, "He couldn't die until he had had it" .
 "There was," she said, a little boy in him that had never been released.
After three weeks' honeymoon in Mentone, they returned to London where Eliot succumbed to bronchitis.
They were staying in a hotel until they could find a Hat, but his doctor insisted that they spend some days in Brighton so that he could properly recover.
In April they were finally able to move into Kensington Court Gardens, off High Street Kensington.
There were the usual problems of moving — Valerie Eliot, apart from having to scrub and prepare the flat, was also forced to continue with her old secretarial duties since her successor's father was ill.
But by the beginning of May Eliot was safely ensconced: he had a typewriter, desk, table and chair and was looking forward to starting work again.
Visitors noticed a quality of cosy impersonality about the new flat, with its  watercolours and its piles of books, but Eliot never seemed much to care about his immediate physical surroundings.
He was now, in any case, extremely happy; "I'm the luckiest man in the world," he told Robert Giroux, and to Joseph Chiari he said that he did not think he deserved such happiness.
This was a quite remarkable transformation in a man who only two years before had talked of dying: neither fame nor literary achievement had brought him any contentment, and in the end it was human love, the love that he had dismissed in his writings as the consolation only of ordinary men, that rescued him from a lifetime of misery and isolation.
The Eliots were inseparable; they went to parties where they would stand arm in arm.
He would often hold her hand when they were at large gatherings: it was, one friend wrote, "very touching" .
Valerie Eliot was also his protector — as a secretary she had for a long time been organizing his daily life and guarding him from the world, and it was probably the calm assurance of her presence which first drew him towards her.
His family had protected him when he was a child and youth, and the search for another such secure haven was one of the dominant notes of his life: both in its denial during his marriage to Vivien which rendered him so anxious and insecure, and in its triumphant restitution at the end of his life.
He was now much more friendly and jaunty — "I am thinking of taking up dancing lessons again," he told a reporter from the Daily Express, "as I have not danced at all for some years" .
To his friends he seemed changed: the nervousness, the apparent decrepitude and the look of illness vanished.
It is as if this had been the artificial carapace which had now dissolved and there emerged the smiling, bright-eyed figure of Eliot, with an expression close to that of the photographs taken of him in childhood.
In an early draft of the play upon which he was working the elderly public man is compared to a silkworm who has chewed the bitter leaves of the mulberry all his life.
It is time to leave off, his daughter tells him, it s time to burst forth like a butterfly.
Eliot's life, for the eight years still left to him, now took on a different pattern.
He wrote at home in the morning and then, on free afternoons, he liked to walk with his wife in Kensington Gardens: particularly he enjoyed watching the boats which children brought to the Round Pond there.
He spent three afternoons a week, from Tuesday to Thursday, at Russell Square; although he was still active as an editor, at least with the work of those authors  who were now also old friends, age and reputation necessarily meant that he was now much more of a "figurehead" than once he was.
In what he called "emphysema weather" , he did not venture out at all and in his last years one member of the firm, Peter du Sautoy, would report to him on the business being conducted — what books had been accepted, for example.
Sometimes he would vehemently disapprove of the choices, but du Sautoy remembered his "mysterious smile" as well as "his laughter, with a hint of mockery in it" .
In the evenings, if the Eliots did not go out to the cinema or theatre together, they would often listen to the gramophone — he had an especial affection for the music of Bartok, although sometimes he would play the songs of Edward Lear.
He would also read to his wife at the end of the day — from Boswell's Life of Johnson, from Coleridge's Letters, from Rudyard Kipling's Kim (an especial favourite) and sometimes from his own work.
Valerie Eliot now looked after his private correspondence, and would type out fair copies of his own work from his typewritten drafts.
 "He usually asks me for my criticism," she said to one interviewer.
"I'm often terrified to reply and I try to get out of saying anything.
But he is a genuinely humble person".
His domestic happiness meant that his desire to see other people waned somewhat, and there were certain friends who felt themselves to have been "cut out" of his life.
But those whom he had known longest remained close to him: he, Herbert Read, Bonamy Dobrée and Frank Morley would meet regularly once a fortnight or so, each in turn hosting the others at his club.
But if this state of comparative retirement owed much to his desire to experience as fully as possible the companionship of marriage, it was also imposed upon him by the demands of his still fragile health.
His doctor constantly suggested to him the benefits of sun and sea air (not that he needed any encouragement to visit the sea, since it still evoked for him the happiest memories), and in July they travelled, with Eliot's sister who had come from America, to the Isle of Wight for two weeks.
In September the Eliots were in Scarborough, again for a fortnight, but on his return he contracted Asiatic influenza.
It was a protracted illness, accompanied by a high temperature, and it precipitated another bout of bronchitis.
He was not properly well again until the end of October, although he was still extremely resilient.
But when he had recovered sufficiently he  wanted to resume work as possible on his play.
He had already drafted two acts at the beginning of the previous year, and even before he had been taken ill this autumn he had begun the work of revising them.
He worked consistently on the third act, and by the end of the year he had finished a draft of the entire play.
The fact that he had written a large part of it after his marriage led him to think of it as a work quite different from the one he had originally envisaged.It was while engaged on it at Kensington Court Gardens that he added the more tender love scenes which provide its real poetry.
He had never written verse of this kind before, and it did not come easily to him: the drafts of these scenes underwent most revision.
In December, while in the last stages of composition, he stayed at home because of the London fog, and at the beginning of the new year he took to his bed for a week with a slight chill.
But he was in a sense revivified: his heart withstood the weakening effect of his illnesses much better than it had done in the same period of the previous year, and this was the first winter for some time when he had not been forced to seek treatment in a clinic.
He said in one interview that public honours meant nothing to him until his marriage but, even so, the mist of respectability now clung about him always.
He was part of a delegation that went to the BBC to complain about proposed cuts to the Third Programme, the "cultural" channel of the broadcasting service; he was working on the Commission for the Revised Psalter; he was asked to give evidence to the Parliamentary Commission on Obscene Publications (he had had very little experience of pornographic literature, he told the members of that commission, and his own work was "quite anodyne" ).
And in March 1958 he travelled with his wife to Rome where he was to receive an honorary degree: it is a mark of his extraordinary fame that students lined the route to the university and shouted "Viva Eliot!" as they drove by.
In the following month the Eliots travelled to the United States, primarily so that he could introduce his wife to his numerous relatives and friends.
When they visited Texas he asked why the young men seemed so gloomy when there was so much to be happy about, and in Cambridge he publicly embraced his old friend, Conrad Aiken, moving Aiken almost to tears.
Everything had changed and, when he gave two readings at Columbia University and the University of Texas, on both occasions he made the same disclaimer — that he had almost lost contact with  the young man who had written the earlier poetry.
It might be more accurate to say that he had escaped from him.
Just as he had the ability to compartmentalize his life, so he also seemed able to slough off the weight of the past and begin again.
But there was so much of that past now that he could not easily do so: when in 1959 there were rumours that the original manuscripts of The Waste Land had been found (false rumours, as it turned out) the news, according to an acquaintance, "depressed him" .
The Eliots returned from America in May, and rehearsals began almost at once for the Edinburgh Festival production of his new play.
It had originally been called The Rest Cure but Eliot discovered that the title had already been used and, after some hesitation, he replaced it with The Elder Statesman.
Sherek recalled how nervous and agitated he seemed at the first reading with the actors — just as he had been when he had first shown the play to Sherek.
Even marriage could not cure him of all his anxieties, and it is salutary to remember that, in some situations, he was as frightened of other people as they were of him: he often seemed shy and hesitant in conversation still.
When Stravinsky visited the Eliots in this year, his amanuensis, Robert Craft, recorded that"he is a quiet man, slow in formulating his remarks, which trail off in diminuendo…
His long fidgety fingers fold and unfold, too, or touch tip to tip".
And yet underneath this diffident and subdued exterior, there was a passionate temperament which he was generally at pains to control.
When in July, for example, he was asked to testify for the London Library against a rating valuation, he was visibly nervous before giving his testimony (it seems, according to Rupert Hart-Davis, that he had been awake the whole night before).
At first he seemed fumbling and awkward when under cross-examination but the prosecuting counsel said something which annoyed him, and he responded fiercely and eloquently.
The rehearsals for The Elder Statesman proceeded although, because of Eliot's marriage, they were "haunted by gossip writers" .
On 24 August the Eliots travelled to Edinburgh for the first night and, once again, the reaction of the audience was favourable.
On this occasion, he did agree to make a speech on stage after the performance, although at first Sherek "thought he was not going to say anything at all, because he just stood there trying to see his wife's face in the audience" .
If it were not for the scenes written after his marriage, The Elder Statesman would have been by far the grimmest play he had ever written.
Lord Claverton, in whom selfishness and ambition have combined to produce a "public man" , now in bad health and at the end of his career, contemplates the sterility of his life.
His meditations are interrupted by two figures from his past, who remind him of separate acts of cowardice and inhumanity.
Under the infliction of their memories, and prompted by a self-examination which is all the more rigorous for coming so tardily, his artificial, public self collapses and the real man, the ordinary human being, emerges.
He confesses his past mistakes to his daughter who reaffirms her love for him and then, at the close of the play, he retires to the shade of a beech tree and dies.
His daughter and her fiance are left on stage, where they confirm their love for each other with a poetry that Eliot would have once found impossible to write:
Not even death can dismay or amaze me Fixed in the certainty of love unchanging.
The critics seemed to approve of the poetry, although they emphasized the theatrical and "dated" aspects of the play.
Martin Browne himself believed that Eliot was too ready to rely upon outworn social and theatrical conventions, but suggested that they "reflect an unconscious reversion to the drama that Eliot must have seen as a young theatregoer before 1914" .
It would perhaps make a poignant epitaph to Eliot's creative career that he should return to the literary associations and memories of his youth in America — the "Victorian American" who even in his rebellion against that inheritance marked himself as its true heir.
But the "theatricality" of the play works beneath the purely formal level: Lord Claverton has always acted a role and it is only at the end of his life that he allows his true human self to emerge, although
…the longer we pretend The harder it becomes to drop the pretence, Walk off the stage, change into our own clothes And speak as ourselves.
Theatrical images of this kind are apparent throughout Eliot's work and, as Browne has remarked, "The image of the actor finding himself on stage in the wrong part comes to Eliot as the expression  of a climax of disturbance" .
One character in The Elder Statesman remarks, "Forgery…is a mug's game" , which is precisely what Eliot had said of poetry twenty-five years before.
It is not necessary to conflate the two to recognize how artifice and expression are deeply implicated with each other in his work — how one can only speak freely by playing a part, like Cyrano in the shadows.
But just as one theme of the play is that of artifice discarded, so Eliot produces here some of his simplest and most expressive poetry.
There are passages of great beauty in the play, sustained by a perfectly adjusted theatrical cadence.
The sudden transitions and complications have disappeared along with the irony and grandiloquence — and with them, too, the bitter distaste for the world and the yearnings for an elected fate as saint or martyr.
He returned to London with his wife on 2 September, and the London production of the play opened at the Cambridge Theatre three weeks later.
A party was held at A L'Ecu de France to celebrate the first night, and on the following evening a small reception was held at Kensington Court Gardens to celebrate his seventieth birthday.
There were only a few guests — among them Martin Browne and his wife, Rupert Hart-Davis and Jacob Epstein (whom Eliot had come to like and admire when he was sitting to him).
Eliot's presents were laid out on the table, and there was champagne and a birthday cake: when Rupert Hart-Davis lit the candles on the cake, Eliot knelt down and blew them out.
Epstein proposed a toast to him, to which he replied, "This is the happiest birthday I've ever known" .
Nothing could interfere with that happiness now.
When The Elder Statesman received less than adulatory notices, and failed to succeed at the box office, he was noticeably calm in his reaction.
And the fact that he seemed to accept the failure of his play, which in previous years would have depressed and unnerved him, is further evidence that he was now a more sanguine man.
In an interview which he gave in this year, the reporter noted how he seemed much "heartier, more unworried and more unafraid of the world than he did…five years ago" .
"
Love reciprocated is always rejuvenating,"Eliot told him.
"Now I feel younger at seventy than I did at sixty.
Any man if he is alone becomes more aware of being lonely as he ages.
An experience like mine makes all the more difference because of its contrast with the past".
In other interviews celebrating  his seventieth birthday, he made similar confessions about his private experience — confessions which, in the past, he would have been too defensive to make.
He was "more reconciled and calm" than he had been at thirty; "age had not made him wiser" but I have never been wise".
There was also the prospect of more poetry although "They would have to be new poems in a new idiom" .
He had written one poem since his marriage, dedicated to his wife, which is couched in a spirit quite different from any poetry he had written before — he had finally, he told Cyril Connolly, written a poem about love and happiness.
And he was looking forward again: "I don't feel I've ever got to the point I aim at and I don't think I ever will, but I would like to feel that I was getting a little nearer to it each time." 
The future, it seemed, was all before him.
But the truth is that he was never to publish poetry again: he had come to the end of his creative life.
In his first schoolboy poetry the theme had been of love withered and decayed — practically the last lines he ever wrote were of "the certainty of love unchanging" .
He had come a long way.
The winter of 1958 again induced his emphysema; it was foggy, and he could not breathe without effort.
He had had no holiday at all during the previous year, and the absence of sunshine and warmth affected him.
And so in the middle of January 1959, the Eliots travelled to Nassau in the Bahamas, stopping at New York on the way there and on their return.
Although Valerie Eliot did not like long sea voyages since she suffered from seasickness, and Eliot complained to friends like Marion Dorn about the expense involved, they travelled to the West Indies regularly over the next five years.
There are photographs of him taken on this and other trips: Eliot smiling sleepily at the camera, wearing a white cap and sunglasses, smoking a cigar and wearing a pink shirt and blue pullover.
In March they returned to England, and he attempted to catch up with all the work and correspondence he had left behind.
Many of his public obligations were thoroughly familiar — on 12 May, for example, he gave an address at the University of Sheffield and then two weeks later received the Dante Gold Medal at the Italian Institute — but other duties were more painful to perform.
He had reached the age when friends and companions were beginning to die around him, and in the spring of this year he composed  memorial addresses for two of them: William Collin Brooks, who ten years before had encouraged Valerie Fletcher to apply for the post of Eliot's secretary, and Father Eric Cheetham, who had "taken in" Eliot after the separation from Vivien.
Two years later, Geoffrey Faber died also — the man who had taken pride in the fact that, many years before, he had "rescued Eliot for poetry" .
In the middle of May the Eliots went to Leeds to stay with Valerie Eliot's mother — her father had died in the year of her marriage.
This visit, too, became an annual event — Eliot enjoyed the quiet of his mother-in-law's home, and Mrs Fletcher in turn was much taken by what she called the "virginal" quality of her son-in-law.
The Northern air, in the countryside around Leeds, seemed to revive him and, in the company of his new family, he grew to love the area.
On his return to London in June, however, he caught a cold which aggravated his emphysema and his doctor advised him to go once more to Brighton in order to recuperate.
When Craft and Stravinsky visited him in the autumn of this year, Craft has recorded how he looked "younger and livelier" than he had before, but that he seemed"to think of himself as a hoary ancient with little time left.
 "I cannot accept lectures," he told his guests, "because the people who pay for them expect me to attend cocktail parties at which I am caught between someone wanting to know what I think of existentialism and someone asking me what I really meant by such-and-such a line" .
In spite of this disclaimer, he did continue to give lectures — in America especially, where he was paid very large fees for his performances.
In fact the Eliots travelled across the Atlantic for the second time in October; when he stopped at Chicago to give a reading on his way to St Louis, a reporter noted that he "looked rather tired and smiled in a vague, undirected way" .
One journalist asked him about "The Love Life of J. Alfred Prufrock" and he replied gravely, "I'm afraid that J. Alfred Prufrock didn't have much of a love life" .
What is most remarkable about the talks and lectures he gave on this trip is the extent to which America now revived in him the memories of his childhood.
In November he gave an address at the Mary Institute; the ghosts of the past were all around him as he spoke of the door into the schoolyard, the corridors, the whisperings of his enclosed childhood world.
And then, for the first time in his place of birth, he read The Dry Salvages which opens with the Mississippi, the river which had so  impressed his childish imagination.
Before another reading of this poem on the same visit, he announced that it began where he had begun, and that it ended where he and his wife hoped to end — in the parish church of a Somerset village; he could see now the pattern of his life completed.
The Eliots returned to England at the end of November, and as a precaution against catching bronchitis he was taking antibiotics.
He was bearing the cold and damp better than he had in the previous year, but these winter months were a time when proper life had to give way to the struggle merely to exist.
The fog exacerbated his emphysema: he was short of breath, found it difficult to walk very far, and had to stay at home in seclusion.
On his doctor's orders the Eliots went to Worthing in January, but the weather there was almost as bad for his emphysema, and he could only manage short walks along the seafront.
The only recourse was to get out of England altogether and so, with some hesitation, they travelled to Morocco at the end of the month.
He caught a cold on his way to Tangiers which affected his left lung, but this was merely the prelude to what became an unfortunate trip.
The weather inland was much too dry for him; there was an earthquake at Agadir; the heat and dust affected his lungs and he succumbed to a bout of bronchial asthma.
The whole visit was something of a disaster, and he was still recovering from it months later.
While in North Africa, however, he did manage to write out a fair copy of The Waste Land, in order to raise money for the London Library.
As he did so, he remembered a line which almost forty years before he had struck out of the poem at Vivien's insistence.
Now he put it back in.
In spite of his ritual attempt to distance himself from the young man who had written that poem, he knew very well that even his contemporary reputation in large part rested on it: that, and the last three of the Four Quartets, he told Ezra Pound, had been worth writing.
His letter to Pound was one of a series between the two old men.
Pound had been released from confinement in April 1958, largely as a result of Eliot's collaboration with Robert Frost and Archibald MacLeish in petitioning the American government, but his exhilaration at his new freedom did not last very long.
In the autumn of 1959 he wrote to Eliot from Italy, where he was staying with his daughter, expressing grave doubts about his worth as a poet.
Eliot at once sent him a cablegram, saying that he was one to whom all  contemporary poets owed a debt.
He followed this with a long letter two months later, in which he tried to convince Pound of his achievement and to sympathize with the despair and anxiety which now assailed him.
Pound was now also afflicted with guilt and remorse at the shape his life had taken, and Eliot did his best to comfort him.
He was now "Dear old Ez" , and in a number of letters they commiserated about the problems of age.
It is a poignant correspondence.
In many ways they had both been so much alike: the nervous, magpie-like intelligence, the pedagogical aspirations, the Yankee toughness combined with the shuddering sensitivity.
They had both lived through the great period of modern literature and had survived its passing: they were in a sense foreigners, out of joint with their time.
And yet Eliot had always been the subtler and more complicated man, shrewd enough to make his peace with an age to which he did not truly belong.
Pound had noticed those qualities when, in 1915, he had written to Henry Ware Eliot in order to explain why his son should remain in London and not return to America — his course, he said, would be smoother than Pound's own.
But he could not have guessed that, almost fifty years later, Eliot would be loaded with honours and with happiness while he himself would have retreated into a silence of guilt and despair.
And yet, despite this, there was too much to separate the men; they exasperated each other and yet they needed each other.
They knew what bound them together, and those bonds would be loosened only in death.
Eliot had in his early seventies become an historical figure, or one at least in whom the lineaments of history could be traced.
He said in one interview that, whatever his final merit as a poet.
he would perhaps have a "certain historical place in the literary history of our period" , and Herbert Read recalled how he might on occasions say, "Valery, Yeats and I…" .
He was no longer particularly interested in the work of younger writers; this was partly because he no longer felt confident in his judgments about contemporary writing but, at a more general level, he believed there had been a profound falling off in the standard of both literature and criticism since the Second World War.
He told one interviewer that there was little, if any, worthwhile poetry being written in England; of the poetry of "the Movement" , then a fashionable group, he said that it showed neither motion nor direction, and he was also scornful of  the present generation of critics and reviewers.
He was resigned to the thought of English culture sliding, as it were, into the abyss and his major preoccupation was with the past and his own place in it.
That is perhaps why he was still sensitive about his public reputation — an essay in Twentieth Century on him by Edward Dahlberg, and a book by Northrop Frye, both incurred his displeasure; he insisted also that certain lines about his alleged anti-semitism should be removed from the preface to Wyndham Lewis's selected letters.
He was eager to put the past in order, and to make his peace with those who had once been his contemporaries.
He wrote a preface to David Jones's In Parenthesis in which he noted the fact that Jones was of the same generation as Pound and himself; he also wrote a preface to Lewis's One-Way Song and described him as one of those who had been falsely labelled by "the Messenmensch" as a fascist but nevertheless chose "to walk alone" .
He was also ready, during the proceedings over Lady Chatterley's Lover , to go into the witness box and publicly recant his previous attacks upon Lawrence.
But the opportunity did not arise: he waited in the corridors of the Old Bailey, but was never summoned.
Although he still expressed private doubts about Lawrence, it was necessary for the public gesture to be made: Lawrence was, after all, part of that same generation of writers of which Eliot was now almost the sole representative.
Four months after the Eliots returned from their disagreeable holiday in North Africa, he contracted a virus and was forced to stay in bed for two weeks; once more the rhythm of illness and flight from illness established itself.
In July he was in a nursing home where Rupert Hart-Davis found him reading a detective story and studying a Penguin book of crossword puzzles — he was "in excellent spirits but his breathing was bad" .
On his doctor's orders he went up to Leeds and Scarborough in August, returning at the end of September.
The late autumn and winter again aggravated his emphysema and he looked tired and pale.Although he preferred to stay where he was, his doctor insisted that he travel once more to the sun for the worst of the winter, and at the end of 1960 the Eliots went to Jamaica.
He took the precaution, however, of carrying a typewriter and books among his luggage so that he could prepare for an address at the University of Leeds which he was to give in the following year.
In Jamaica he sunbathed and swam in the sea (swimming always seemed to alleviate his disabilities), drank rum punch and slept very well.
As a result his breathing was better and he had put on weight but, as he told Seferis, "the spirit sleeps" in such places:he became bored and restless.
In March they returned to England, and he was eager to get back to work at once.
He was already contemplating a new play, but he had first to work on an essay on George Herbert which he had promised to Bonamy Dobrée.
His affection and solicitude for Dobrée, as for other old friends like Herbert Read, Philip Mairet and Frank Morley, is very touching, and he seemed now almost a grandpaterfamilias for the men who had known him so well.
In June he went up to Leeds for a three-week holiday: the air of the Yorkshire moors always did him good, and there were in the vicinity a doctor, an oculist and a radiologist to examine him periodically.
But his wife was always his chief protector — he did not like her to leave his side for more than a day.
Towards the end of his stay in Yorkshire, he gave the Convocation Address at Leeds.
In this lecture, "To Criticize the Critic" , he set his own prose writings in historical perspective — once more setting the past in order — but it is also notable for the manner in which he asserted the presence in his theoretical judgments of private feeling and experience; phrases like "the objective correlative" and "the disassociation of sensibility were, for him," conceptual symbols for emotional preferences".
And, in the preface to David Jones's In Parenthesis written in this year, he declared that "Understanding begins in the sensibility" .
Can we not see in this new conviction of the importance of emotion and sensibility that awakening of feeling which his marriage had accomplished?
 "The critics call me cold and learned," he had said to Virginia Woolf many years before: and the truth was, that he was neither.
In the middle of November the Eliots travelled to America, where he made five public appearances in order to pay for their forthcoming holiday in Barbados after Christmas — as long as he could "hobble up a stage" , he could still pay for such trips.
But he did not like leaving England, even in the winter, and, among the American tourists of Barbados, they soon felt homesick: Eliot was convinced, too, that the manager of the hotel in which they were staying was trying to exploit his presence there.
They returned in  March 1962; he at last finished his essay on George Herbert but, before he could start work on a new play, he had to prepare for the press his early graduate thesis on the work of F. H. Bradley.
His youth now seemed so distant that he was no longer particularly interested in such matters, and he confessed to his wife that he did not understand a word of that thesis.
But it was, in fact, the last serious work he was ever able to do.
In July the Eliots travelled up to Leeds, and although he had a mild infection in August he said that he felt in much better health.
It was about this time, however, that friends began to notice a change in his physiognomy: he was much more hunched, leaning forward as he stood; his face was paler, and the lines more accentuated.
In December he became ill after a four-day "smog" and collapsed.
He was rushed to Brompton Hospital where for five weeks he lay under continuous oxygen.
At first his wife never left him, since the doctors had told her that it was vital that he should find her there when he came out of his coma, and then when the immediate danger had passed she visited him three times a day and gave him his meals.
Although his situation was critical — and, for a man of his age almost hopeless he pulled through.
He came out of hospital in January 1963, and convalesced at home for the next few weeks.
His wife wash d and shaved him, and ensured that he swallowed the twenty-six pills each day which had been mainly prescribed for his heart.
It was a cold and damp winter, but he recovered slowly and indeed seemed cheerful; he sat beside the open coal fire in the drawingroom and would sometimes sing music-hall ditties as his wife ministered to him — "coddling" , he used to call it.
He had no visitors, although once or twice a week his secretary might come to deal with his correspondence.
At the beginning of March his wife drove him to Regents Park, and he was able to take a few steps in the spring sunshine.
In the same month they travelled to Bermuda for six weeks so that he might convalesce in the warmth: he responded well, and was walking more easily.
But he was now in the last stages of his infirmity.
Allen Tate visited the Eliots in September, and saw how weak he was.
When Tate took his leave, Eliot stood at the door of the drawingroom leaning on two canes; Tate waved goodbye, and although he was not able to raise himself from the canes he smiled and made a movement with one hand.
At the end of November, however, he was able to make one last trip to his native land, and the Eliots stayed in New  York for the whole of December.
Stravinsky had dinner with them there, and was concerned by Eliot's ashen complexion and faltering walk.
During the meal,"The poor man bent over his plate, drinking but not eating…
He raised himself bolt upright only at intervals".
Eliot talked about Missouri and his childhood there and then, at the end of the meal, he proposed a toast to Stravinsky: "Another ten years for both of us!" he said.
But the past, not the future, now claimed him: on this same trip to New York, he told William Turner Levy that he had dreamed of his family as it had been when he was a small child.
From America they travelled on to Nassau.
The swimming in the hotel pool benefited him, he told Herbert Read, but he was more and more conscious of the weight of the years.
They returned in April, and in June visited Leeds for the last time.
And then in October he collapsed at home.
Five doctors said that his condition was now so serious that he would not last the night: he was rushed to hospital, paralysed on his left side and in a deep coma.
His wife sat with him for thirteen hours, and he clutched her hand as he struggled for life.
In the morning, barely conscious, he turned to his wife "and looked at me as if to say" I've done it "" .
He was sent home from hospital after a short period, since the doctors thought it more important that he should be there with his wife, and he shouted "hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!" as he was carried over the threshold.
He was now under continuous oxygen and too weak to take solid foods, but he would sit by the fire in his wheelchair for two hours each day while his wife read, or played music, to him.
Until Christmas he seemed to be making progress, but then his heart began to fail.
He relapsed into a coma again, returning to consciousness only once to speak his wife's name; and on 4 January 1965, he died.
After her husband's death Valerie Eliot declared, "He felt he had paid too high a price to be a poet, that he had suffered too much" .
Two years before his death, he had told Herbert Read that the best of his poetry had cost him dearly in experience.
But the poetry which emerged front that experience is hard and clear, and it is as if his capacity for suffering existed with an immense ability to use and to order it.
We are confronted with a number of paradoxes: Eliot proclaimed the impersonality of great poetry, and yet his own  personality and experience are branded in letters of fire upon his work.
He was a poet who insisted upon the nature and value of a tradition, and yet he had no real predecessors or successors.
He was a writer who attempted to create order and coherence, and yet his central vision was of "the Void" .
His poetic voice is unmistakable, and yet it was composed from a number of other poets' voices which he adapted or borrowed.
He was a strange, private and often bewildered man who was raised into a cultural guru, a representative of authority and stability.
Throughout his life Eliot brought the anguish of his difficult and divided nature to the surface of his poetry, just as in oblique form he analysed it in his prose.
His predilection for order, as well as his susceptibility to disorder, were immense and in the jarring, crushing equilibrium between the two his life and work were formed.
Both as a writer and a man, his genius lay in his ability to resist the subversive tendencies of his personality by fashioning them into something larger than himself.
His work represents the brilliant efflorescence of a dying culture: he pushed that culture together by an act of will, giving it a shape and context which sprang out of his own obsessions, and the certainties which he established were rhetorical certainties.
In so doing he became a symbol of the age, and his poetry became its echoing music — with its brooding grandeur as well as its bleakness, its plangency as well as its ellipses, its rhythmical strength as well as its theatrical equivocations.
He had left instructions for his body to be cremated and in April his ashes were taken, as he had wished, to the little church of St Michael's in East Coker, the village from which his ancestors had come.
It was the final dramatic, but telling, gesture.
On the memorial tablet to him in the church are the words, "Remember Thomas Stearns Eliot, poet" .
His dates of birth and death are added, together with two phrases: "In my beginning is my end" and "In my end is my beginning" .
Both have been chronicled in this book, and perhaps we can say now of Eliot what he once said of another poet, "We also understand the poetry better when we know more about the man." 