

Setting Off
The road from Mandalay to Wigan Pier is a long one and the reasons for taking it are not immediately clear…
I wanted to see what mass unemployment is like at its worst, partly in order to see the most typical section of the English working class at close quarters.
This was necessary to me as part of my approach to socialism, for before you can be sure whether you are genuinely in favour of socialism, you have got to decide whether things at present are tolerable or not tolerable, and you have got to take up a definite attitude on the terribly difficult question of class…
All my notions — notions of good or evil, of pleasant and unpleasant, of funny and serious, of ugly and beautiful are essentially middle class notions; my taste in books and food and clothes, my sense of honour, my table manners, my turns of speech, my accent, even the characteristic movements of my body, are the products of a special kind of upbringing and a special niche half way up the social hierarchy…to get outside the class racket I have got to suppress not merely my private snobbishness, but most of my other tastes and prejudices as well.
I have got to alter myself so completely that at the end I should hardly be recognisable as the same person.
George Orwell The Road to Wigan Pier 
Nearly fifty years ago a posh, lanky young man packed his bags and made off into the undergrowth of England.
Like a mountaineer conquering his own nightmare, he embarked on a two-month personal encounter with the unknown — the  working class, who populated his childhood memories as a spectre of fear and loathing.
He made a sentimental journey — it was a conjugation of the personal and the political — amidst the supposedly silent majority, the people excluded from politics who appeared as vagrants on the doorstep of democracy.
The man was George Orwell and he called his journey The Road to Wigan Pier .
He'd done something like it before, he'd tried to purge himself of privilege by becoming a tramp, descending among the down-and-outs of London and Paris.
This time he didn't pretend to be other than he was, a writer in exile from his own class, setting out to see with his own eyes the state of emergency among the Northern unemployed.
The journey made the prodigal a pilgrim.
He never became one of the people, but he measured the material conditions of their existence and tried to take their side.
And if he did not give the people, the sherpas who guided him through the terrain of industrial England, their own voice, the journey gave him a voice of his own.
As the thirties was our last great depression it commands comparison with the great depression of the eighties.
Now, as then, the compass of consensus quivers and makes a dash for the Right.
Economic and political crisis, the attacks on the working class and its expulsion from the political stage, incites inquiry.
Its absence from politics excites ruling-class fears of riotous rebellion and confounds its allies' belief that suffering is the agent of revolution.
Then, as now, the obvious lesson is that socialist will in England is ignited not by misery but by buoyancy, not pessimism but optimism.
For sure, the eighties has already had its riots and can expect more, it has seen insurgent movements for progressive and peaceful life on earth, symbolised by the first women's embrace of the Greenham Common base in December 1982 which shifted popular consensus against the new generation of nuclear weapons.
But neither has found an authentic expression in the institutions of representative democracy.
The eighties remains an enigma — already we know more about the rise of  the radical new Right than we do about the demise of the old Left.
The last great depression took Orwell out on to the road, on a quest for the meanings of mass poverty.
He also used his chronicle for an assault on both the Right and the Left: Wigan Pier was as much a political tract as a travelogue, it was an indictment of the Right and an ultimatum to the Left.
Then, as now, the paralysis of progressive institutional politics found its echo in the threat of world war — this time would be the last time.
The crisis of the eighties occasions a return visit.
So in July 1982 I set off on a similar journey.
Throughout Orwell's Wigan Pier you have a strong sense of him tramping around on foot.
I took my bicycle on the train, with two packs slung on the back and a typewriter.
I used wheels where Orwell went on foot.
For six months until the end of 1982 I travelled in the Midlands, the North-East, South Yorkshire and Lancashire, staying in working-class homes in Coventry, Sunderland, Barnsley and Wigan.
The genre of the journey is rooted in the quest for the essence of England and Englishness.
My journey was both inside and outside that tradition, because I learned that the quest for an essence dissolves the dynamic differences which describe the working class itself (aside from class differences which are one of the most apparent characteristics of England)— poor and unskilled from skilled, men from women, young from old, waged from wageless, organised from unorganised, black from white.
Now more than ever England is a reluctantly cosmopolitan society, and it comes easy in England to subordinate the different experiences of sexes and nationalities to a single archetype.
But that habit falsifies a description of England, which is multi-cultural, multi-racial and multi-coloured.
This book is not an analysis of that anatomy.
It is only a description of some working-class experiences of poverty and politics in cities visited by George Orwell in the 1930s.
While following his route I have added two other cities, Sunderland and Coventry.
Sunderland is in the Northern region which has endured industrial decline for  much of the twentieth century.
Coventry is in the Midlands, England's industrial eldorado.
Coventry is a new town, with the proverbial shopping precinct and housing estates on the periphery which are rescued from an atmosphere of impermanence only by their inhabitants' gardens.
It is a car town and it is a city of immigrants, white, brown and black: Scots and Irish have staffed its militant shop stewards' movement, and the races came together in the city's wondrous two-tone band, the Selector.
I wanted to go to Sunderland because it is in my own region, the far north.
It is an old ship-building town, it once produced a massive proportion of British vessels, but it has been in decline for decades.
It was only recently a town that offered waged work for women, though much of that has disappeared in the past few years, and it was never a town that invited black workers.
It's a white place, like Wigan which only seems to have a Black population on Tuesday nights when the music from the Wigan Pier nightclub's jazz-funk DJ draws in young Blacks from as far as the Midlands to body-pop.
Wigan was once a coal and cotton town, now those industries are dead and it's much like anywhere else, with a bit of light engineering and service industries.
Barnsley was a coal town and Sheffield a steel town, like Rotherham.
But South Yorkshire's old industrial staples are deserting it.
Rotherham has an Asian presence, but most of the places I visited are the old, white, axis of the English working class, immunised from the input of England's new nationalities.
If I had followed a different route through Bradford or Brixton the complexion of this story would have transformed some of its objectives: whiteness and blackness would have encountered each other dramatically.
Although this return to Wigan Pier is a northern journey, it is not an analysis of the regional dimension of England's decline — although clearly the feel of the crisis in Sunderland bears no comparison with Surrey.
Throughout my journey I found myself saying, "they're different countries, North and South" .
Now I think that was wrong and that the odd and interesting thing is precisely the opposite: Sunderland and  Surrey are different and they are both England.
Similarly, I have not specified the Englishness or whiteness of people in this book, nor the blackness of others.
Usually only blackness is named, which constitutes the white majority as the norm.
So I have, for the most part, named neither although wherever I was I sought a Black or Asian presence.
The fact is that Orwell's route takes us through a largely white part of England.
The first question that arose in my mind was: what have I to do with Orwell?
The answer: only a point of departure.
Though nearly fifty years later I have followed a similar route to Orwell's, his book is all that we share.
He was an upper-class old Etonian, a southern ex-colonial.
I'm from the North, from the working class.
Like him, I'm white, I'm a jobbing journalist; unlike him I'm a feminist.
I grew up among the kind of communists and socialists who guided him into the working-class communities and who staff some of their struggles.
Politics is to me what privilege was to him.
My journey into the hinterland of industrial England led me on a trek across familiar territory among familiar people.
Nonetheless, as for Orwell, it was an adventure.
For twenty years my life has been lived within the Left, and the companionship and creativity of many of the people I have met have changed me.
Just as his political commitments exiled him from his own class, so my politics involve an awkward relationship with my own class.
Why?
For a start, it is a subordinate class, and being a socialist means surrendering a culture of subordination for self-determination.
It is a relationship of commitment and estrangements which haunts many activists, not only in the cosmopolitan community of socialists in London, but within the Northern working class itself.
And being a feminist puts a woman both inside and outside the mainstream of working-class politics, which are stewed in sexual prejudice and privilege.
I began as the kind of feminist who said, "It's not men, it's the system," but this journey convinced me that men and masculinity, in their everyday, individual manifestations, constitute a systematic bloc of resistance to the women of their own community and  class.
Both individual men and the political movements men have made within the working class are culpable.
So, while committing me to my own class, my politics also has its own critique of working-class life and institutions.
But unlike Orwell, my journey didn't make me repudiate my own class — it did the opposite, it recuperated my class belonging.
And for that I'm grateful to those who peopled my journey.
The men and women I met often spoke of regret and loss — not a nostalgia for the past, those glazed memories that falsify the hard history of the working people by claiming that the past was better.
It wasn't really that.
It was an unnamed, unacknowledged loss of something that never was, a kind of melancholy, a mourning for unspecified neglect, the neglect of a socialism spoiled by superstition, subordination and sexism.
Yet they also speak of resilience and creative intervention in life, particularly the women.
Orwell wrote his experiences of the working class by reference only to men.
Men still do this — they talk of men's struggles, movements and characteristics as if they were writing about the whole class.
As a feminist I didn't invert their bad habits by only talking to women — this book is about women and men, though it takes the standpoint of women as its reference point.
Orwell begins his book in the long and honourable tradition of popular journalism — you don't stalk your readers, you shock them.
He delivers the wretched data of life in an itinerants' lodging house.
It's the worst you can imagine, down and out in Wigan.
If the lodging house was the bottom line of men's poverty then, what is women's today?
No doubt an account of a hostel for the homeless would be audacious and arresting, but would it be an authentic scenario of life lived on the edge of ordinary extremity?
What makes ordinary women homeless?
What typifies that extremity in our time?
To answer this question I followed Orwell's first metaphor for working-class poverty and asked the question: what does intermittent itinerancy tell us about the conditions that produce the poverty of women?
So my road back to Wigan Pier started in a refuge for battered  women, mostly mothers.
In the seventies the women's movement exposed the prevalence of violence against women and provided safe passage in the network of refuges which exist in about a hundred cities.
They exemplify a new tradition among women which defies the conventional wisdom that community spirit is dead and that the women's liberation movement is middle class and marginal.
The refuges symbolise the renewal of militant self-help by working with women in crisis at the point where their sex and class oppression meet.
Those first few days of my adventure were very sad, partly because of the temptation to identify with the pain present in the refuge.
Like the other women, I'd recently left my own home because I couldn't carry on there any longer and I'd been given safe spaces by friends with room to spare.
It was an act of creative destruction, but in those first few days at the refuge what had seemed positive began to seem rootless and resourceless.
I felt poor, wandering around lavish shopping precincts, counting pennies in supermarkets, always feeling hungry, saving change for telephone calls, counting my losses.
In embarking on this journey, I'd put myself into store again and set off; like the other women I needed safety, I needed to be taken care of, to take care of myself and now to take care of this journey.
But what had slipped from sight was that these women weren't victims, they were survivors.
Their stories weren't ones of passive pain, but tales of active resistance — having somewhere to run to, they'd got a grip of their own lives.
And their resilience changed the tone of my whole project.
The women I met in the refuge, and others I met in the first few weeks of my journey, stated their own investment in this book: they didn't want to be objects observed, they wanted to be its subjects.
Late one night, talking in one of their homes, one of them said, "What's this book about, anyway?" 
I said it was about how working-class women and men live the recession.
 "Is it going to be for us as well as about us?" she asked.
Her question remained with me throughout the rest of the journey.
For six months I lived in  the homes of working-class women, men and children.
I spent the days and nights talking with tenants, trade unionists, blacks and whites, punks and skinheads, single parents and old-age pensioners, their neighbours, workmates and relatives — anybody I could lay my hands on.
I'd return home and do all the usual things that keep your sense of yourself — eat, play around with children, do my washing, telephone my nearest and dearest, talk late into the night with my hosts, have fantasies, pleasure myself.
And throughout the journey, the question asked by that woman in the beginning anchored the emphasis of this book, it shook a fist at the ghosts over my shoulder (because like most people I give to others the power to intimidate and censor from afar) and it forced me to make the chronicle accountable to its subjects.
On The Dole
Our unemployment allowances miserable though they are, are framed to suit a population with very high standards and not much notion of economy.
If the unemployed learned to be better managers…
I fancy it would not be long before the dole was docked correspondingly.
George Orwell,The Road to Wigan Pier 
Could you live on £1,300 a year?
It's less than the benefit you'd receive if you were an invalid or an old-age pensioner and you'd get more if you were a widow or a student.
Most of us probably think that the dole is what you live on when you're unemployed, a statutory right which was brought in to bury the hated means test of the 1930s However, when the modern national insurance system was introduced in 1948 unemployment benefit was still not expected to be sufficient to maintain a wageless man with wife and children; it was an arbitrary figure which could be topped up.
Unemployment benefit is now £25 a week.
£1,300 a year, for a single person.
According to the government, it's a figure which isn't expected to bear any relation to the minimum cost of living.
Not surprisingly, most of the unemployed don't live on it because they can't.
With mass unemployment, means-tested supplementary benefit is the new mass benefit for the unemployed.
When Peter Townsend  and his army of researchers monitored low incomes in the sixties and seventies for their massive study, Poverty in the United Kingdom (Penguin, 1982), they found that about a quarter of the unemployed were drawing supplementary benefit.
The proportion has now soared to two-thirds — DHSS figures for 1982 show that only a minority, 713,700, exist on the £25 a week unemployment benefit alone — 2,612,000 "top up" with supplementary benefit, and another 1,428,500 depend on supplementary benefit alone.
(These include school leavers who've never had the chance to make National Insurance contributions toward unemployment benefit and the long-term unemployed whose unemployment benefit is exhausted after one year.
It doesn't include the unregistered and unmeasured unemployed — women with men who have to maintain them or claim for them, and those whose dole is exhausted but who are disqualified from supplementary benefit because they live with wage-earners.)
There are no criteria specifying the minimum conditions of existence supposed to be covered by unemployment benefit, but parliamentary regulations define the basic resources of daily life to which people on supplementary benefit should be entitled:
Food, household fuel, the purchase, cleaning, repair and replacement of clothing and footwear, normal travel costs, weekly laundry costs, miscellaneous household articles, cleaning materials window-cleaning and replacement of small household goods (for example, crockery, cooking utensils, light bulbs), and leisure and amenity items such as television licences and rental, confectionery and tobacco.
I've never yet met a claimant who could afford a television licence.
The Supplementary Benefit Commission also says claimants should be entitled to an income that "enables them to participate in the life of the community" .
They mean that as well as being fed and warm, claimants should be able to buy newspapers, visit relatives, retain membership of trade unions and churches, and be able to live in a way that "ensures, so far as possible, that public officials, doctors, teachers, landlords and others treat them with courtesy due to every other member of the community" .
These conditions of participation are impossible for anyone living on supplementary benefit.
Here are some of the weekly incomes and budgets of some of the people I met living on social security: One man and woman in their early twenties living in Coventry with one child, mostly unemployed since leaving school, have a total income of £5.25 child benefit.
Weekly bills total: rent £27.36 loan payment £3.00 sheets and blankets club £5.00 TV hire purchase £2.00 electricity £4.00 gas £3.00 bike payments £2.00 £46.36 Their food bill averages £15 a week.
Their average diet is toast and porridge for breakfast, nothing at mid-day (the child has school dinners), sandwiches or beans on toast at tea-time, cooked meals only at weekends, usually sausages or chicken and vegetables.
Sometimes the woman gets vegetables from her father's garden.
This is what she spent on her last three pairs of shoes: £3.99 in 1977, £9 in 1980 (when she was working) and £4.99 in 1982.
She has never possessed boots or winter shoes: "I can't afford closed-in shoes, so I always wear sandals and in the winter I just put on two pairs of socks." 
She never buys a paper and never goes out for the evening.
A redundant fitter from the Coventry car industry in his mid-forties lives alone and receives £61.02 a fortnight.
His regular commitments — rent, electricity, etc. — are £38.08 and 50p insurance.
That leaves him £22.44 a fortnight for everything else.
When I met him he'd just done his shopping for  two weeks.
It included forty cigarettes, a white sliced loaf, tea bags, two lamb chops, half a pound of liver, pork for Sunday dinner, two tins of peas, two pints of sterilised milk — "Not because I like it, but because it lasts longer," he said.
He slapped a £10 note on the table: "That's all that's left to last me the rest of the fortnight." 
He can't pay the television licence and tosses up every week between washing powder, toothpaste or soap: "I can only afford one at a time — personal hygiene is an expensive item." 
He only ever puts the gas on half-way to the first mark on the knob and in the winter keeps the central heating down to sixty degrees: "I sit with the blanket round me." 
He can't afford hot water, except for twice a week when he puts on his immersion heater for a bath.
His shoes are one size too big, cast-offs from a friend.
A woman I spoke to in Coventry lives with her two children and husband, had worked as a cashier, a canteen assistant, a barmaid and a bingo cashier until she was sacked for organising a union.
They get £54 social security, plus £10.50 child benefit.
This is her weekly expenditure: rent £21.78 electricity (plus arrears) £12.50 gas £1.00 club £6.00 sheet man £1.00 boots club £1.00 £43.28 This left about £17 to feed the four of them for a week.
They spent £16.80 and had 20p left.
A Coventry couple with two children: she has never had a paid job, he worked until recently in a Birmingham car factory where his last take-home pay was £65.
Their income from social security is £12 electricity and £5.20 gas — is taken off at source by the DHSS (Department of Health and Social Security).
This  includes contributions towards arrears — heating bills are high on their hard-to-heat council estate.
This leaves £25.30 a week.
The week I met them they had £2 left after shopping for food.
A good day's diet is spaghetti bolognaise for tea.
Bad days are beans on toast, biscuits, or "some days we just don't eat" .
Birthdays are their only nights out, remembered as they repay the debt incurred and relish the memory of being full up.
Their neighbours are all on the dole and they all talk about food: "I'll say to them you can't be starving on Wednesday because it's not Friday — giro day," says their next-door neighbour.
They save their child benefit and draw it monthly to help buy big items, like new jeans bought after the DHSS turned down his application for a clothing grant, and to pay for driving lessons — he's hoping to get a job as a driver.
Heating is regarded as a basic amenity.
In the I970s the fuel boards were pressured by the Labour government not to disconnect households with children providing they would cooperate in paying off their arrears.
This was formalised in the Codes of Practice introduced in 1976.
A spate of fires in disconnected homes, culminating in the deaths of children in Sunderland, prompted Southwick Neighbourhood Action Project to carry out a survey of disconnections on an interwar estate of semi-detached houses recently modernised with gas fires, back boilers and central heating.
Seventy per cent of the people living on the estate had no wage and depended on state benefits.
There were few electricity disconnections, not surprising since heat and hot water were provided by gas, but nearly a fifth of the households surveyed had had their gas cut off.
Among households with children under sixteen the figure rose to 20 per cent: Twelve per cent of households with children under five had been disconnected, but this rose to 43 per cent among households with children between twelve and sixteen.
Nationally, electricity disconnections total over 91,000 and gas nearly 30,000 and according to Richard Berthoud's comprehensive study, Fuel Debts and Hardship, published by the Policy Studies Institute in 1981, about a third of  disconnected customers have pre-school children.
A woman living with three little girls, the youngest still only a baby, on Coventry's hard-to-heat Woodend estate had no electric light for eleven months.
 "At least it got me reading," she said.
There was an armful of Mills and Boon love stories on the mantelpiece bearing witness to nearly a year of quiet, no television or radio, only romances by candlelight.
Tenants on the Platt Bridge estate in Wigan were paying staggering heating bills for one- and two-bedroom maisonettes, culminating in bills of between £250 per quarter in 1982.
"It took us a couple of years to persuade the council that it was their fault not ours.
They thought we misused the system when actually it was expensive in the first place and faulty,"said a middle-aged woman who lives on the estate.
She never uses the central heating system, only turns on a single bar of her electric fire for about half an hour and then off again for another half hour or so.
I met many + tenants on similar estates who do the same thing — their heating amounts to "taking the nip out of the air" and putting on cardigans to go into the bathroom or kitchen.
Poverty changes the meaning of key words — one person's credit becomes another person's debt.
Basic provision of shelter, heat and light often consume more than half the total income of unemployed claimants.
This means that although the supplementary benefit regulations say that claimants are entitled to shelter and warmth, their benefits rarely measure up to it.
An unemployed Coventry couple, a clerk and a carpenter with two children, live on £64.50 including child benefit.
Rent, electricity and gas take more than half — £35.28.
They had to take out a loan to pay their last fuel bill.
That's typical — a survey by the Child Poverty Action Group and the Family Service Unit in 1981 found that 80 per cent of people on state benefits borrow money to pay their housing or fuel bills.
Many of the people I met also rely on loan companies and clubs who scour the poorest housing estates to find their neediest clients.
They buy bedding, household equipment, clothes, shoes — and money.
 "The club men have a field day," said one of their clients in Coventry.
One came round and sold me sheets and then he offered me a loan.
You think to yourself, yes I could get the kids shoes or pay the gas bill.
The card you get from the man says that if you get into arrears you have to pay extra interest, but it doesn't say how much.
So you end up paying double what you borrowed originally — it's happened to me.
A bill comes in and along comes sugar daddy with a loan, you can t resist it.
And you end up buying food with it.
Mass unemployment once again makes the means test a mass phenomenon.
Despite the entitlements spelled out in the supplementary benefit regulations, many of them are subject to discretion.
 "I applied for school uniform grants for the kids," said an unemployed woman in Barnsley with three children.
 "This bloke said," Well, it depends on discretion, you're not entitled, you know, and it's not in my hands, my superior has to decide."
So I said,"discretion!
I am entitled!"
But I didn't want to get too argumentative because it might have alienated him and I need his support."
A twenty-one-year-old mother of two small children in Coventry said,"I told social security that the children's shoes were too small, but they wouldn't give us a grant.
All I've got for myself is flip-flops.
The DHSS suggested I save 25p a week for new shoes."
She has an outstanding fuel debt of council estate packed with redundant car workers and her husband is himself one of them.
He was given his last — and only — pair of trousers on his birthday nearly a year earlier by his father.
When they acquired holes he applied for a clothing grant.
"They told me that the trousers would need to be stolen from me to qualify.
But they couldn't be because I never take them off."
Did they ever go to jumble sales?
 "No." 
I asked why not?
 "Don't want to." 
Why not?
 "Can you imagine what people round here cast off?" 
A young mother living in a damp flat with unheated bedrooms where the mould appears in charcoal blots across the wall, has a child who has suffered several bouts of pneumonia and now has chest convulsions.
She wanted to keep her telephone for emergencies, but "the DHSS said it  was a luxury" .
Another unemployed woman with an epileptic six-year-old couldn't pay her £33 telephone bill.
 "I wanted to keep it because I didn't want to leave him while I went out to use the phone — assuming there's one round here that works, which I doubt," she said.
But the phone was cut off, the DHSS didn't regard it as a necessity.
Welfare workers complain that discretion increasingly means "No" .
An advice centre in Sheffield which helps claimants apply for special needs entitlements, like bedding, said,"We apply but we often have to take the DHSS to a tribunal to get them.
We don't bother any more if we've not got a good chance of winning.
It's important to take a case just to try, but we've never won such a case yet.
Discretion has nothing to do with it any more."
But what is happening now is worse than discretionary whim, it is an echo of the power of the means-test "nark" of the 1930s who could make people sell their goods and chattels before qualifying for relief.
Households in the Coventry area report that they are being subjected to intimidation reminiscent of this time.
When a woman in her early thirties moved into her council flat she was still working, so she bought a fitted carpet and a freezer.
Now she's unemployed and her husband has tuberculosis and they live on supplementary benefit with their two children.
When they applied for help with arrears,"The DHSS told me to sell some of the furniture or the telly.
They said sell the freezer and you don't need a fitted carpet."
Another couple living on total state benefits of £64 had acquired everything they own at least second-hand except for a coffee table, bedding and clothes bought through a tally man.
Social security officials suggested that they sell some of their furniture and the television before receiving help.
This contradicts the spirit of the supplementary benefit regulations and suggests that the means test is being enforced with new vigour.
Weekly budgets don't tell life stories.
If you had to live on £25 a week you could, for a while.
But sooner or later it turns into a crisis of resources — practical, personal and political.
When you've lived on subsistence for two years what do you do when your shoes wear out, when you get a £100 fuel bill, when the washing machine breaks down, when a pair of children's shoes cost you more than you'd spend on your own?
Poverty makes economy impossible, not because the poor are improvident but because economy is always a matter of scale — bulk buying demands bulk incomes.
The poor don't possess The Paupers Cook Book or Good Food on a Budget or magazine pull-outs of cheap casseroles — for a start, a "pauper's" cuisine is always more expensive than beans on toast and if you're a pauper you can't buy books and magazines anyhow.
You can't have an overdraft and you may not even have a bank account.
Weekly budgets also don't describe what isn't bought — a television licence, a holiday, a night out, trips to the swimming baths, roller skates, the Radio Times, a pound of plums.
Common fantasy that a spell on the dole is the change that's as good as a rest assumes that the pastimes of the poor are the weekend pleasures of the employed — drinking, fishing, playing with cars, playing pool, playing bingo, going to the cinema.
But none of this is possible on the dole; even going to the park carries the risk of unexpected expenditures — ice creams and bus fares back.
The resources for participation in the life of the community — promised as an entitlement by the Supplementary Benefit Commission — disintegrate.
An unemployed couple I met in Coventry cannot visit their parents on the other side of town — at £2.88 the cost is prohibitive.
A whole family employed in the Midlands engineering industry have been living on supplementary benefit for two years: the grandparents in their mid-40s, two married sons with children and a teenager living at home.
The only people they ever see are each other.
People can't keep telephones, they can't indulge in the little white collar thefts of stamps, stationery and phone calls from work, they can't buy newspapers or maintain friendships.
My dad tells me he met a friend of his aged 59, unemployed, who'd sold his house, car, video and now his wife is in hospital after taking an overdose.
They can't claim compensation from the  government for that.
Life on the dole becomes a very little life.
Like pleasure, politics costs money.
The poor are collectively starved of political resources and support.
The cult of self-help, usually visited upon the poor, actually belongs not to the poor but to participants in society, the respectable, self-helping, self-respecting institutions of organised communities and classes.
The very fact of unemployment cuts the wageless off from the resources of the waged working class and its labour movement.
They aren't just individually unequal, therefore, they have unequal access to the resources of organisation.
Political organisations have secretaries and stationery, offices and officials, telephones, minutes, records, xerox machines, bulletins, handbooks, pension funds and subscriptions — all of which amount to the means of making decisions and developing self-determination.
Time the unemployed have got, money they haven't.
But to be a political person, to intervene in life, you need to have these minimum resources — telephones, stamps, stationery, posters and printing presses — and the price of a bus fare and a pint after a meeting.
An unemployed engineer in Coventry, who joined the Labour Party after being made redundant, walks to all his meetings and reckons he wears out his shoes three times faster than when he was working.
He goes to the meetings but he can't stay behind afterwards for the real meeting — in the pub.
Everyone but the columnists of the Daily Mail and the Daily Express knows that the dole isn't enough to live on and asks the rhetorical question, "How do people manage?" 
The answer is that they can't.
But that knowledge has been buried in the war of words which has accompanied mass unemployment.
In the 1930s the words "means test" was a curse, fuelling the resistance against it both among the unemployed and some of its administrators.
Its renaissance with the new wave of unemployment has been echoed by a new contest of concepts.
And this time the poor are losing — the notion of "scrounger" has been mobilised as a new scourge against them, not only successfully legitimating the dole as  the lowest of low benefits, but also its actual reduction (through the abolition of earnings-related benefit in 1981) and the enforced dependence on the means-tested supplementary benefit.
And now the Thatcher government threatens further reductions.
Just as the government of the 1930s defended cuts in relief and the expulsion of categories of claimants on grounds of costs to the country, so the Thatcher regime has conquered popular concern with poverty by a populist counterattack.
The scourge of scroungerism has converted the unemployed into the poor, the poor into the undeserving poor and sympathy into suspicion.
The demands of the unemployed workers' movement of the 1930s had an unexpected radicalism, not because people then were more "political" , but because the unemployed were able to make their own measure of an income.
Now it seems unthinkable to ask the question: why are the unemployed so poor?
Why are the unemployed poorer than students, or the sick, or widows or old-age pensioners?
Because the unemployed don't have their own political resources, there is no popular campaigning focus for the minimum income needed for participation in the life of a community.
There is a wilful scorn for the problem on the Right, and a wilful fantasy on the Left that the worse it gets the better it gets — the people will rise in spontaneous combustion the more intense is their misery.
You hear it all the time, as Thatcherism makes its long march against the historical inevitability of socialism.
The labour movement bewitched by the enemy, bothered and bewildered by the passivity"of the people, waits like Micawber for something to turn up.
The Witchhunt
The Means Test is very strictly enforced, and you are liable to be refused relief at the slightest hint that you are getting money from another source.
George Orwell,The Road to Wigan Pier 
The weary DHSS staff of respectable old Oxford were relieved of certain unpleasant duties in the early autumn of 1982 when a 200-strong squad of police mopped up unsuspecting itinerants said to have defrauded the welfare state by allegedly drawing social security for rent when they were sleeping rough.
This was a supposed £1.5 million racket.
It was the consummation of a campaign waged for five or six years to change the acceptable face of the unemployed into the unacceptable face of the scrounger.
All the better that the operation rehabilitated the credibility of the police who'd been having a bad press in the early years of the decade.
Here was the strong arm of the law moving in where the seemingly soft-hearted and soft-headed welfare state feared to tread, the unwitting accomplice in benefit banditry.
The campaign against scroungers began in the mid-seventies when the Labour government inaugurated the recession with public spending cuts and implicated the poor in the nation's plight by refusing to immunise them against the economic squeeze.
This rendered all claimants potential suspects.
Special squads were set up in 1976 against what the Daily Mirror called "Britain's army of dole queue  swindlers" .
The Daily Telegraph joined in, fulminating against the welfare state's profligate fanatics, spendthrifts of the taxpayer's money.
The campaign in the popular press mobilised a backlash against the very idea of the welfare state itself.
Any evidence of the growing army of unemployed being anything other than paupers — smoking cigarettes, having holidays, playing bingo, having children — was regarded as, if not illegal, then certainly improper.
Scroungerphobia was monitored by two researchers, Peter Golding and Sue Middleton, who reproduced in New Society one of the Daily Mail's diatribes against "Scroungers by the Sea" in 1977: "The seaside social security offices are thick with subsidised cigarette smoke, the smell of alcohol paid for by the state and the smugly tanned faces of leeches feeding off the hard-working, ordinary, silent majority." 
Golding and Middleton argued that the "focusing of moral outrage on items like this does as much to create concern as to reflect it." 
A plague was diagnosed, the symptom was the scrounger, the cause was the state's slush fund and the victim was the people.
At a stroke, claimant became synonymous with criminal.
The campaign crossed class boundaries and created an apparent unity of interest between taxpayers and workers held to ransom by skivers supported by a soft state.
The Labour Party itself, in sponsoring vigilante sleuths within the social security system, was implicated in this political realignment of wage-earners against the wageless.
Scroungers, like Reds, became the enemy within, rootless, lawless and workless, a ragged spectre scavenging among the respectable citizenry.
Even before the witchhunt began, one million eligible claimants were estimated to have failed to collect £240 million in supplementary benefits to which they were entitled.
By the end of the decade, unclaimed supplementary benefit reached £410 million.
Of the 4,190,000 households entitled to rent rebates only 2,930,000 received them.
There are special targets of scroungerphobia — homeless men and single mothers.
Both are under the greatest attack from a government committed to drawing back from the  welfare state.
This it does by minimising public provision of childcare, child benefit, housing and jobs and maximising the private responsibility of men for dependent women and children.
These two categories, single mothers and homeless men, disturb accepted notions of normal male and female roles.
Unemployment leaves many men without the means of providing for women and children, and increasing divorce and separation is symptomatic of a growing instability in sexual relationships between men and women.
More and more women are going it alone, and men are rendered homeless by housing allocation policies which do not account for the needs of the single and childless.
It is single mothers and homeless men who are subject to the most intense state scrutiny because they are both in greatest need of state support and represent the greatest challenge to "normal" masculinity and femininity within the family.
 "Responsible" men are men with responsibilities, homes, children and wives, and that moral code is written into social security regulations to enforce responsibility for women and children as the economic essence of masculinity.
The very idea of dependency is incompatible with masculinity.
Former Social Security Secretary Patrick Jenkin alluded to this when he cut the benefit to which homeless men were entitled on the grounds that people would be aggrieved by these itinerants getting"more actual cash in hand by being homeless (sometimes by choice) than by contributing toward the cost of a household and accepting the attendant responsibilities.
The Oxford saga began when a local reporter investigating landlords who appeared to be cheating the DHSS was taken off the case.
The next thing he knew, the Thames Valley Police were calling the landlords as prosecution witnesses in "Operation Major" — dubbed "The Sting" by a tabloid newspaper  — after the police had arrested hundreds of their tenants (all claimants) for allegedly defrauding the DHSS, by supposedly drawing social security to pay their rent when they were actually not paying any.
It seems that the Oxford DHSS management collaborated with the police.
Their own staff had become acutely discontented — they were understaffed and overworked, and after the hype was all over Oxford DHSS was closed down by a strike lasting two months against understaffing.
The DHSS had known the landlords were overcrowding their hostels, sometimes cramming four or six men in a room, and some were even lodged in an asbestos shed.
Conditions were gross.
A local charity worker visited one of the hostels and found four old men sleeping in a basement "using a large baked bean tin as a chamber pot" .
Residents complained that sometimes they'd come home to find someone else sleeping in their bed.
One of the landlords was reckoned to make £400,000 a year from the DHSS.
It appeared that they encouraged the men not to live there, but to claim social security as if they were.
The landlords took a cut of their social security in exchange for verifying their tenancy.
The incentive for the men was that as homeless itinerants their social security would be under £20 a week.
Under this transaction they collected both rent and other money.
Sleeping rough in the open air that summer seemed no worse than sleeping rough inside.
Few people seemed to care about the conditions of the hostels or the chronic shortage of appropriate accommodation which rendered these men vagrants.
The victims could be blamed and punished with impunity.
After all, they weren't proper men attending to their responsibilities.
That made them eminently punishable.
They were outlaws.
Men in other hostels around England watched the witchhunt with resignation.
One, living in Newcastle on Tyne's Salvation Army Men's palace, told me that homeless men lost basic citizen's rights because "laws apply to them but never for them" .
The moral panic generated by scroungerphobia represents homeless men as feckless fugitives from their proper role.
But the overwhelming majority of the palace's clients when I was in the North-East were local men, and nearly half — the biggest single category — were there because their own homes had been disbanded.
-Housing allocation policies have no place for men once a family has broken up, so hostels for the homeless become their place of first and last resort.
Far from helping the men help themselves to their rights, neither the Salvation Army nor the housing agencies told them they had any.
And when they attempted to claim them, they were offered the ultimate solution — the street.
Nearly ninety homeless men staying at Newcastle's palace signed a petition protesting against the food.
According to one of the inmates,"You know what they, said?
 "There's the door" ."
The rules and regulations of the hostels make sure they never feel they actually live there.
In the absence of any alternative network of support provided by the politics they participated in as employed men, the labour movement, they are thrown on a charitable sector dominated by a punitive and puritanical morality.
As a result, they feel themselves not only homeless but in a total existential crisis — ending up on the dossers circuit removes the last residues of respectability.
A middle-aged building worker who arrived at the palace — his first time in such a place — after his marriage had broken up, said, "I was a little bit disgusted, they don't treat you as if you were just unemployed, they treat you like a person who has just crawled out of the gutter." 
He is unemployed because he is ill, he gets £40.95 sickness benefit and the hostel takes £30 for bed and breakfast.
He spends his days on the street, in cafes or on buses.
A former Post Office engineer returned to the South after his marriage broke up.
He was unable to find work and went back to the North to be near his little boy.
After breakfast at the palace all the inmates are thrown out, whatever the weather, and the only place he can take his child is outside: "Usually I take my little boy at weekends to  the fair at Whitley Bay, or I take him on the metro and we sit at the front — he loves trains.
Or we play in the park all day.
I haven't anywhere else to take him."
At night, the temporary territory is hardly their own: "You get your own room in the Salvation Army, and technically you've got a lock," said a man in his early forties who was sent there after losing his job and marriage.
"I learnt to live with other people when I was in the Services, but when you've paid for your own room and it isn't your domain you feel insecure.
They can just walk in."
Another unemployed divorcee said he'd been sitting in his room late one night talking with a fellow inmate:
There's a rule about bed time, 11.30 p.m.
One bloke burst in and told us to go to bed.
We refused.
Then we were asked to leave.
So I decided to do a bit of checking.
We discovered from a Department of Environment Circular that a House of Commons Committee was disgusted at our lack of rights in hostels.
I was convinced that the law would back us, so I found someone at a local law centre and she confirmed it, so we went back.
We took a couple of cops with us to prevent a breach of the peace and I heard one of them saying it was pointless putting rules and regulations on the wall because most of us couldn't read!
At the hostel they were furious with us for bringing the police, they just wanted us out, literally, and we were out!
Because we were on a voucher system from the DHSS that pays your rent we had no choice about where we were sent.
So we were sent to another hostel.
It was a large warehouse that had been converted by the addition of beds into a dormitory.
I had a very lively night — I woke up and the sheet was crawling, literally crawling with lice.
The assumption is that men live in their father's family until they have families of their own.
When that breaks down, they're sent to what used to be the poorhouse.
It still is.
It is also women who are the targets of the state's sex stormtroopers, the Special Claims Control squads set up in the 1970s.
These are flying squads who descend on social security offices to make random raids on both men and women.
The men they're looking for are those with skills  saleable on the black economy — plumbers, mechanics, electricians, etc.
The women are single parents: they are easy quarry.
The squads arrive, often unwelcomed by DHSS staff, scour the files and pull in the mothers in order to ensure they're not cohabiting.
Social security staff, welfare rights workers and men and women in several cities have picketed the interlopers on arrival.
One of them saw a list of their original haul when they visited Coventry.
 "They were all files of single parents," she said.
The campaign works indirectly by rumour to frighten people, and whatever they can or can't prove the threat is carried by word of mouth and claimants run for cover.
A Sunderland woman in her twenties who had a lover for several years who spent some but not all of his time in her home, said,"We decided to start claiming together because there were a lot of snoopers around, and people I knew had got done.
But we were £10 shorter as a result."
The Special Claims Control squads also harass women directly by threats that their benefit will be stopped and with soft talk about men sponging off women.
 "Bring him down to see us," they say, "and we'll tell him how he can and ought to claim for you." 
They do this despite evidence of noncohabitation, or by forcing couples to cohabit.
Here is the story of one of them, a women in her forties, the mother of three children:
I had my eldest child when I was twenty.
I was working in a car factory at the time.
I loved that job and the money was good, oh god yes!
I was living with my mam in a council house.
Then I went to work in another factory as a machinist and I moved into a room with the child.
That was the hardest time.
My mother was a pensioner.
I was on the dole then, getting £5.50 a week and the rent was £2.50.
God knows, I ate nothing half the time.
I was there six weeks without heating, and every day I walked to my mother's, which was quite a distance.
Then I got another job, the same kind as a machinist, and I put the baby in a nursery.
I kept on at the council, but it wasn't easy to get a council flat in those days.
Eventually I got an old house, I had another baby, I was still working and put the kids in a nursery.
The father moved in and I  got a full-time job in another engineering company.
But it wasn't the same when they went to school.
When they were at the nursery I could take them at 7 a.m. and pick them up at 6 p.m.
But when they were at school they were just in and out, and home at 3.30 p.m.
So I couldn't work, and he got the money from"the social security.
It was terrible, I'd always been independent, or when I wasn't for a while I got my own social security money.
But I never knew from one week to the next if there would be any money.
We got transferred to another old council house, it was very damp, but it was a new start, and I decided that if he wanted some responsibility, OK the tenancy could be in his name.
But we didn't get on so he wanted a place of his own.
I had to sign a paper saying I'd be responsible for the arrears.
To get rid of him, I did.
I don't know how I did it, but, do you know, I did.
I was determined, so I agreed to pay it back every week.
Even though he'd gone, I saw him a bit, he'd visit me and the kids whenever it suited him.
I'd also got an injunction against him because he became violent, and that was all right for a bit.
By then I was on the dole.
He'd come and visit, but I wasn't having any trouble with him and life was pleasanter.
Till the knock on the door — two investigators said they'd been watching my house and he was living with me.
I admitted he visited me but that I'd had a history of violence with him, and anyway I'd got an injunction.
I told them the truth — he visits me, but he doesn't live here.
I gave them the address where he was living.
They said me and him had to go to the social security the next morning, and if he didn't he'd be picked up.
I spent the day frantically trying to find him.
They said if we didn't consent for him to claim for the two of us, they'd summons me and him for aiding and abetting.
Well, I found him and we went to the"liable relatives' section of the DHSS.
They did a crafty one — one came out and a woman came in, very nice, telling him he had to face up to his responsibilities, she said she'd help us, they'd get him a job, they'd pay his rent and he had to move in with me for a month's trial.
I just kept saying to her it couldn't work.
I said I've had nearly ten years of this and it can't work.
I said I know what my life is like with him, I had an injunction, plus I had my own money and I was managing better.
They wouldn't take any notice.
They only had one objective — to save a few bob for the  government.
So we left there that Wednesday morning and they said they'd give us until the Friday to think about it.
But we still got the threat: I'd be summonsed, and no way did I want to go to court.
It was a terrible position to be in.
But they left us no choice.
They came on the Friday and we signed the damned papers, didn't we, and they took away my social security book.
I knew.
It took only until the next Wednesday when he beat me.
The first thing I did was get on the phone to her.
So she came out and read the riot act to him.
 "Face up to your responsibilities," and all this.
I said, "You've given him a bloody licence to do it." 
These new laws mean the police can't chuck him out.
They can't.
During that time I had them out three times because I thought I'd make them see.
He started then with the money, because he had the giro, so I was getting into a mess again, wasn't I. So for a couple of weeks we were paid separately.
She said to me, "Can't you get away for a few days?" 
My sister and me are very close, so this woman gave me a giro to go to my sister's — they took me to the station and put me on the train.
The giro was £20.60, the fare was £12 and I stayed about six days.
I came back — god, I'll never forget it, the house was a pig hole.
I was only back a couple of days and it started again.
I picks up the phone and dialled a special number for the fraud squad.
I was just politely told they'd left the area — "This number is no longer available as the special investigation team has left the area." 
I was lumbered.
This just went on — the arguments, no money.
Life got that bad that I just used to sleep with the kids.
One night he came back, ripped the bedclothes off and one of my kids managed to get out somehow and call the police.
They came and saw the state of me — black eyes, my nose bleeding.
They took us to the police station and then to a battered women's house at about 2 a.m.
The person on call made us a cup of tea — battered wives' homes are the greatest!
Even though we were only in one room, me and the kids, and one of the boys was thirteen then.
Anyway, they were marvellous, they couldn't do enough for you.
They helped sort out the money.
I'd left with nothing because he was still in the house and I was terrified to go back.
They helped fix us up with clothes, then with a solicitor for an injunction.
No way was I going back to that house.
About six months earlier I'd put my name down on the lists of three housing associations, because I was  sick of the council houses they were giving me.
So the letting officer from one of them said they'd got a house for me.
The DHSS made me go to see them every day — I had a broken bone in my ankle but they still made me go every day!
So, I'd got this house and two or three of us from the refuge went up to the old house and packed everything ready to move.
The DHSS were playing me up over the removal grant, so one of my sons went up to the house to see if there were any letters — everything had been smashed, crocks were smashed and the beds were slashed.
I phoned the police and they arrested him, then they took me up there.
I couldn't believe it.
I hadn't got a cup.
So then I had to put in for another grant because he'd smashed every damn thing.
They agreed to allow one of the workers in the battered wives' home to go up there, when she arrived the house was in two feet of water — the pipes had burst.
We lost nearly everything, because it had all been packed in plastic bags and it had got mildewed.
That was another shock.
So she got straight onto the DHSS and I got a grant for three single beds and bedding.
One of this and one of that, four cups, plates, knives and forks.
My three-piece was wringing wet, but eventually I dried it out, and the rest I just bagged together.
My house wasn't posh, but it was clean and it was mine.
It was what I'd worked for for twenty years.
Nobody from the social went to see it — that grieved me more than anything.
I think the system is wicked.
I sit and think how I've struggled to get a home together, and within a couple of minutes it's all smashed up.
It hit me when I phoned up and they said those two had gone.
So nice.
They should have been brought back to see what they do in saving more for the government, and all the extra work they've caused.
I listened to her story.
She lost everything she had.
It was probably stupid asking her what she felt about it.
When I did, she reflected.
She heard the question and didn't answer for quite a while, just looked at me.
No words.
Under the old DHSS cohabitation ruling, beleaguered by years of criticism from welfare workers and the women's movement, women who had male friends, family or lovers around ran the risk of losing their benefit on the grounds that  these men were or should be maintaining them.
Snoopers were obsessed with finding evidence of sex — slippers under the bed, clothes in the cupboard, pipe on the mantelpiece.
Sex meant money.
But now welfare workers believe"they aren't bothered about your sex life.
They don't care if you are sleeping together.
They're pursuing a different tack — they are less concerned with what is the economic connection than what ought to be".
Thousands of women refuse to accept that celibacy is the price of self sufficiency, and economic dependence the price of sex, but state social policy trails behind this cultural revolution.
It fails to provide the infrastructure for mothers' independence — shelter, childcare and jobs.
And what affronts the system most of all is the idea that the state could help to support women's independence.
THE LANDSCAPE
As you walk through the industrial towns you lose yourself in labyrinths of little brick houses blackened by smoke, festering in planless chaos round miry alleys and little cindered yards where there are stinking dustbins and lines of grimy washing and half-ruinous w.c.s.…at their very worst the Corporation houses are better than the slums they replace.
The mere possession of a bathroom and a bit of garden would outweigh almost  any disadvantage…
If people are going to live in large towns at all they must learn to live on top of one another.
But the Northern working people do not take kindly to living in flats…
George Orwell,The Road to Wigan Pier 
The landscape George Orwell saw when he wandered round the backyard of England is a scene that still inhabits people's memory, though memory incites nostalgia about those "cruel habitations" .
People associate them with community spirit and sunshine, the days when "we had nothing, but were happy" .
But as Orwell recorded the state of interminable slums, he also saw the landscape in transition.
The labyrinth of little streets was giving way to new suburbias stretching beyond the old city boundaries.
Some were corporation housing estates, reservations for thee rehabilitation of the working class.
Unlike the back-to-backs and the tenements built for the poor in the nineteenth century, which treated the poor like prostitutes — they'll always be with us, but at least keep  them off the streets — their function was to take the streetwise communities off the streets and clean up the gregarious clamour of the slum-dwellers.
New public housing was one of the strongest demands made by the working class on the postwar political parties, whose viability depended on their promise to provide it.
The new mass housing was the corporation estate, which mimicked the form if not the content of the middle-class suburbias, though on an unprecedented scale.
What we got — and what George Orwell was beginning to see — were mass municipal prairies.
I'm a product of that process.
In 1950, my family, four of us, about to be five, living in one room, were rehoused on a new estate in a Cumbrian town.
We got a house with three bedrooms, a bathroom, a separate sitting room and dining room, a kitchen big enough for a table and chairs (saving mothers from solitary domestic confinement), front and back garden, a coal house, inside lavatory and outside lavatory and wash house where people stored dolly tubs and mangles, bikes and prams.
And it was brand new.
Estates like ours were out on the urban edge, the new boundary between town and country.
Although we were city kids, we built dens in the fields behind the estate and harvested bluebells and brambles.
Allotments kept people in winter vegetables and summer salads.
When we moved we had one armchair and a sewing machine.
The kitchen had built-in cupboards and shelves — my first memory is of sitting with my little sister in the most commodious shoe cupboard.
Happiness was an inside lavatory and built-in cupboards.
Unhappiness was our cold bedrooms and condensation settling like dew.
So, despite seeming to have all that space, you didn't.
Our new houses were cold and uncomfortable.
The rent, my dad reminds me, took a quarter of his wages.
Now, of course, we are told that council tenants pay more, on average, than the average mortgagee pays in repayments.
Like everything else, things were never as they seemed.
A year after we moved, there was a general election.
Labour recorded its highest vote ever but the Tories got in.
Their Housing Minister was Harold Macmillan.
His main claim to fame was that, bowing to postwar pressure, things should never again be so bad.
 "You've never had it so good." 
He must also be remembered far his housing policy — he stole Labour's thunder and promised 300,000 new homes a year.
But they had to be cheap.
So they were cheap, and nasty, and we now have a housing crisis which will endure beyond this century.
Already, the mass housing programmes of the fifties and sixties are the new slums, having to be rebuilt or pulled down.
People outside London have a strong sense of London being there being somewhere else, Tower Bridge and beefeaters and the Stock Exchange, and BBC voices bring it all into their living rooms.
But London experiences the "provinces" as if they were up the Amazon, up a mysterious not to say treacherous jungle path.
The Ml has carved a path to the hinterland, yet still the cluster of towns around it seem autonomous from the centre.
The very notion of the Socialist Republic of South Yorkshire speaks of a Northern conviction that the North is where class is, the real working class.
But why is it that Northern towns, like anywhere else, have their monumental civic buildings, public libraries and baths, named after and often founded by the old city fathers, local entrepreneurs, the class enemy?
Sheffield Polytechnic's student union is named after the South African black revolutionary Nelson Mandela, but still the streets and civic buildings aren't named after strikes, or tenants.
It is extraordinary how a nation so characterised by class difference should still be so timid about immortalising its own class struggles in place names.
There's a mill near what has come to be known as Wigan Pier.
The old mill owner, who became a millionaire, once installed cannon borrowed from the local landowner at the gates, to ward off machine-breakers.
There's no plaque there to remind the citizenry of the city's civil warriors.
Housing estates are the modern monument of municipalism, more typically than the new civic centres and town halls, and yet they often look improvised or makeshift, as temporary as if they were plains of  prefabs.
Something as simple as whom you name buildings after plays its part in burying history.
And now government-grant-aided industrial units are being built as the centres of our old industrial universe are being laid to waste.
They are a stark contrast to the derelict steelyards of Sheffield, where there's nothing left but acres of scrap lying on flattened ground, or the old factories, which look either like the workhouse or satanic hangars.
It still shocks you to see them — that's where they put the people to work.
If George Orwell were to return to Sheffield today he'd see the metamorphosis from spacious if spartan semi-detached suburbias to dense tower blocks.
An epitaph to this era of modern housing stands on the crest of the city — where once there was a slope of slums, there now stands a barrage of flats for thousands.
They were hailed in their day as "bold" and one of the most uncompromising "developments of the fifties, which simply meant that they were deliberately ugly — the genre of" brutalism".
The only concession to the consumers in this awful, artless building is an attempt to build community spirit into the structure, as if this, one of the few social assets of the working class, would otherwise be given no natural home.
The architects built a system of simulated streets in the air and presumably the people are supposed to play their part in making it all a success by playing in those streets, which measure three metres wide.
There is nothing in the "street" other than front doors — no shops, pubs or laundries, cafe's or telephone boxes, no places to gather.
So the only point of being in the street is to come and go, which is precisely all that people do.
The designers also wanted to provide privacy.
They did this not by providing sheltered gardens or sound insulation, they just put no windows in the street.
Blind alleys.
Such a contrast between those old, solid, yellow stone houses, which seem to last forever, and the corporation estates.
Is anybody proud of this estate, except maybe some of the people who live there who've tried to humanise them with their own gardens?
Because nobody is proud of them, the whole principle is undermined — even lefties are now  saying the people want to buy their own homes?
Do they?
Most of the council estate dwellers I meet don't — they only want a council house they could like and feel some control over.
I know what they mean — I've lived three quarters of my life in council estates, that's where I feel at home.
But why didn't we get the best housing?
This brave new world of social engineering produces the opposite of community contact.
Social scientists doing research at the estate in the seventies were told by one tenant that it would have been "difficult to be more isolated if you had lived in Egypt" .
The social scientists commented that although this was going a bit far, social contact on the estate was "extremely low" .
Estates like this were often sold to the local authorities as packages — they weren't what they wanted, just what they got.
This estate is now one of the most unpopular in the city.
Similar disasters are scattered piecemeal all over Britain, on bomb sites and over the slums they were built to clear.
There's another block in Coventry, neither the best nor the worst of its type.
It's easily missed because its name has fallen off the entrance, leaving an incomprehensible hieroglyph.
But it still stands out, a lone tower surrounded by sedate semis.
The entrance is a brief concrete patio with three smelly skips about four feet high and full of rubbish.
Corrugated shutters supposed to cover the unsightly skips in their cubby hole probably haven't been pulled down since the block was first occupied in the 1960s.
The path from the entrance is littered with remnants from these skips — birdseed, yoghurt cartons, broken glass and old crusts.
Across the patio are a dozen doors, none intact.
They are ex-pram sheds, harbouring bean tins, bits of cookers and carpet.
The patio floor is swept but still stained with grease and barnacles of chewing gum.
A few steps past the skips brings you to the lift, an aluminium cell sticky with spit and sweets and smelling of disinfectant.
I saw this block one sunny August afternoon and although there was no one in sight, there was a murmur of music and children's voices through windows.
Nobody ventured out into the weather, except one woman watering some sweet peas on her balcony.
These homes were like an unsavoury silo, places to store people rather than house them.
Tower blocks have become the symbol for all our disaffection, monumental mistakes for which we can all justifiably blame the politicians and professionals.
It wasn't as if they didn't know they were taking a risk — during the fifties and sixties debates raged in the press about highrise housing, with its defenders calling opposition simply prejudice.
But the pressure was on, with state housing subsidies inciting the architects, builders and local councils to build ever upward and experiment with barely tested materials, to cram the maximum population onto the minimum land mass, so that during the twenty-year tower block boom nearly half a million high-rise homes were built.
All over England there are relics of this reckless eldorado.
One block in the middle of the Northeast garden city, Washington New Town, now stands completely empty.
These flats, the size of a Victorian mill, were evacuated only fifteen years after being built.
People just won't live there.
This sort of thing is found throughout the Northeast.
What was once a landscape of banks of back-to-backs has become an asymmetrical mess of flats and maisonettes.
There's the notorious low-rise Noble Court stranded beside a highway overlooking the Tyne with "Get us out of this hell" written on the wall.
There are the high-rise towers around the edge of Newcastle with a motorway fifty or a hundred yards from their windows.
There's the city's sprawling badlands where all that distinguishes the housing from the old brick back-to-backs is that they're further away from everywhere.
Unlike the ghettoes we all know about, used to keep races apart, where only fools or angels venture to buy sex or sell salvation, these are just another corporation estate.
Nobody visits except debt collectors, reluctant"relatives and social workers.
The most frequent visitor is the ice-cream van announcing itself several times a day with chords from "It's Now or Never" or "Happy Days Are Here Again" .
One estate in Coventry has all the languor of the ghetto.
Fifty per cent of the men are unemployed, and the percentage of women  without a wage is of course even higher.
Like many of the city's estates, it was built for car factory workers.
The small square of shops reminds me a lot of Belfast's battle-scarred Divis Flats — the shop windows are permanently barricaded, many flats boarded up and the walls covered in spray can slogans.
Only one spot is free from juvenile protest, it's a rustic mural across one wall with cows, country cottage and a garden gate.
People said it was painted by "the students" — they're among the few willing takers who get homes on hard-to-let estates — who sound like Siberian exiles doing good works among the peasants.
A pack of dogs swarms out of the entrance hall of some flats.
"That's another thing!
Dogs!"said somebody standing by the bus stop, as if the list were endless.
The people here are marooned on these estates.
They are very, very depressed and consequently quite immobilised.
Low-rise blocks of flats on the same estate squat on scabby scraps of grass, a minefield of dogshit and broken glass, unused even by the army of under-fives who live there.
One patch is even rougher than the rest: the landscaped relic of a bulldozed block, which had to come down because sewage erupted into the sinks and lavatories.
There are no safe spaces around the flats, no fences or shrubs, sheds or seats, to shelter bikes, prams, washing, last year's bulbs, or children.
No places to sit in the sun.
Just nude space.
Kids rush out, only to be followed by shouts of"Wayne…
Lee…
Karen…come in here…"
The very complexion of some of our cities has changed.
The regional shades of red brick and yellow stone which once coloured the cityscape have disappeared, replaced by the grey monotone of concrete.
On the edge of Sheffield town centre the eye confronts some long walls the colour of a storm, so forbidding that not even the kids have made their mark.
This is another monstrosity celebrated as a brilliant piece of architectural engineering.
It looks like a bunker.
Inside it is like a cave, cold and wet.
It has never been water-tight so whenever it rains, water seeps out along the concrete panels, or drips into the middle of somebody's living room.
Insulation, incredibly enough in our climate, did not get housing subsidy and so is primitive or non-existent.
Walls are the surface upon which external cold clashes with internal warmth, the result — condensation and cold walls.
Where tenants in the worst flats have tried to paper the walls, the paper either falls off or clings to the surface with the mildew.
One of the tenants I met looks through her window on to a neat square garden.
But her weeping window sill sheds tears of condensation, scarring the wall down to the carpet which has curled and crumbled at the edge.
Looking over to the block of flats opposite, I can see a window with a dark, damp patch underneath it as big as the window itself: it wasn't raining, but somehow it was wet.
Condensation is an epidemic on this estate and usually the tenants are blamed, as though it were some kind of social disease, not a structural defect.
One of the legends here is that a local authority inspector told a tenant that her furniture was too near the floor and thus rotting her carpet.
It's said tenants cause condensation, by boiling kettles.
And breathing, presumably.
If it isn't rising or descending damp, water finds its way in by stealth.
Rain penetrates through the joints between concrete panels, it accumulates on balconies after rainfall, sits there and seeps through the structure.
 "I was in bed and suddenly this water started, drip, drip, drip, on my face," an elderly man told me.
He was moved to the estate after his old home was "redeveloped" .
One of his neighbours finds water dripping from the balcony above along her ceiling and out near her electric fire.
In certain combinations, concrete, cold and water form a fatal triangle rendering thousands of dwellings unfit for human habitation according to postwar regulations.
Sometimes the structural stability of the buildings themselves is undermined.
During the prefabrication boom of the fifties and sixties some contractors used many times the permitted level of calcium chloride to help speedy setting in concrete — it also helped speedy corrosion.
This has caused dilapidation on the Sheffield estate, constructed on the same system as a consortium of other Northern cities.
After tenants' complaints, the Nottingham local authority commissioned a structural survey which found that the estate was dangerous and in need of immediate support.
Sometimes you can see the results of this decay on the corporation landscape — scaffolding canopies thrown around the base of tower blocks to catch falling concrete, the cracked and corroded corners which drop off like snow, but unless you are looking for it you don't notice it.
This protects the public gaze from the true story and means that for a decade the authorities have been able to work on the assumption that what the eye doesn't see the heart won't grieve over.
As long ago as 1968, central government knew that some prefabrication and high-rise buildings were an economic, engineering and social disaster.
A National Building Agency report in 1968 noted that water penetration and condensation became quickly apparent after occupation, and registered design and structural faults.
It was kept secret.
Blocks kept on being built.
Only after years of dogged activity by tenants backing up their own experiences with systematic surveys, did local authorities bring in the experts, and the tenants were right all along: they were living in leaking, sweating, unstable structures.
Now the local authorities are caught in a cleft stick, hostages to their own political process.
Having ignored the wishes of their own constituents, they must finally heed them.
But, having been seduced into housing packages by the government and the building industry, it is they who must foot the bill — the government won't help and many firms have either gone out of business or seek immunity behind a labyrinth of legal protection.
The London Borough of Hillingdon reckons that the cost of repairing its homes built on the Bison Wallframe system will cost between £1 and £3 billion.
The Colditz cave in Sheffield, described earlier, was built by Shepherd Construction.
In 1983 they were the subject of a strike in Warrington on a £9.5 million government contract.
The builders' union accused the firm of subcontracting wildly to lump labour.
This Colditz estate is to be pulled down.
Though the tenants didn't like living  there, they grew into a community in the course of their campaigns: "We're like old friends now, in and out of each other 's houses," said one of their organisers.
 "We don't want to be separated from each other." 
The demolition of some irreparable towers on Merseyside and London have made high-rise the focus of attention, eclipsing the equally dramatic decline of suburbias.
Since the fifties, the law has ratified tenants' right to freedom from damp, but nearly 40 per cent of the tenants in Shepherd's Nottingham estate said their health had been impaired by damp.
A survey of some Coventry council estates done by Shelter and Coventry Community Workshop in the seventies showed that over 30 per cent of tenants reported furniture ruined by damp.
But the cost of rehabilitation is prohibitive in these complex buildings, honeycombs beyond the reach of reasonable repair.
An idea of the costs involved were given in a Coventry officials' confidential report to councillors and fellow officials in the seventies.
It said the only solution to endemic condensation was full insulation and constant heat — a "provocatively contentious and quite unacceptable" conclusion, confessed the report.
And it isn't just the concrete.
Most corporation dwellings are either inadequately or extravagantly heated.
Thousands are stuck with some of the most expensive forms of electric central heating, and most systems heat only one or two rooms.
Architects, councillors and contractors don't seem to think that the working class need or want warm bedrooms.
We don't inhabit our homes as we used to.
Our grandmothers grew up in the days when women rose at dawn, laid the sticks and lit the fire.
A fire and a woman were the permanent feature of a household.
Since the Second World War only a minority of women work full-time in their own homes.
Most work for most of their lives outside the home.
But heating and housing technology were not brought to bear on this, the single most significant change in the way we live.
Design and costs conspire to make many working-class' households huddle as they always have — all together in one room.
In the late seventies and early eighties an era of public housing came to an end.
The high-rise hype blew up in our faces, with the demolition of tower blocks in London and Merseyside appearing as slow-motion spectaculars on television, hundreds of homes up for less than a lifetime now squandered.
But the high-rise epic eclipses another drama.
A senior corporation planner in the Northeast, who spends most of his time not so much planning as picking up the pieces of careless politics, recalled the principle of high-rise:
They never asked the people what they wanted.
I've been trying to get councillors to find out since then, but that's a very hard job.
Really they don't want to know.
They thought that all they had to do was accommodate people.
Nobody ever asked whether people wanted play space, or this or that kind of housing.
They'd built estates after the war with no amenities at all and they didn't learn from that either.
They just didn't ask the people what they wanted.
The need to put roofs over heads is the excuse councillors always came up with when confronted with the consequences.
It seems honourable enough until you think about it.
But why did they ever think a roof on its own was enough?
I spoke to a middle-aged woman in Sunderland who moved into her council house when it was new thirty years ago.
All there was on our estate was houses for families.
There were no shops, no church, no pavements.
The first things that were provided were pubs and working men's clubs.
One of the biggest problems was always money.
People had big families.
And men were always resentful about their wives getting into anything.
There was nothing for women and children and nowhere for women to go.
It was a long time before I did anything or went anywhere, and then I got involved in the church.
Do you know, when television came it was the biggest event in our lives, for women.
Mind you, there was a lot of going in and out of each other 's houses.
I had a friend and we'd cook a meal and share it and bring the kids together.
Or if you had knitting or sewing to do you'd take it round.
The women used to get very depressed and there were always debts.
And we had battered wives in those days, you know, on our street.
Later on I worked on  the twilight shift in a components factory and as our kids grew up people moved out and others moved in.
But they seemed to have less, don't misunderstand me, I'm not class conscious, but it was a different class of person.
As the original inhabitants leave these barracks, the estates become unwanted stock allocated to people in the greatest need with the least choice — usually poor households with small children.
Several of the worst estates I saw, those with fewest amenities, had double the average number of children on other council estates.
That's not because people had bigger families, it's because they pack them with young, poor parents, ghettos for women and children.
How do they get there and what is life like?
"I got the keys and I just opened the door a wee bit, then I shut it.
You name it and it was there.
Shit all over the floor and the walls,"said a twenty-one-year-old machinist who'd been banished to Coventry's notorious Woodend estate.
It was thrown up after the war to house the car workers.
Nobody wants to live there now.
It happened because me and my little boy were living with my mam.
I'd been working in a factory, but I had to give that up because I couldn't afford a nursery.
My mam moved away but the landlord wouldn't let me stay on because I was on social security.
So I went to the council and they offered me h re or a boarding house.
Here is where they put you when you've got nowhere else to go.
Anyway, I went back to the council — they said it wasn't too bad, but I refused to take it.
They gave me another flat somebody else had turned down.
So I took it.
I had no cooker, no fire, no bed, no furniture, all I had was blankets and sheets and clothes.
The baby's bedroom was damp and his bed got soggy.
The council said it would cost £10 to send somebody to look at the wall and then I'd have to pay to have it repaired.
Since then she's got a new man and a new baby, five weeks old, who lay in her father's arms clad in the all-white uniform of the newborn.
 "We didn't scrounge off the social security for her, did we?" he said, looking at the child's mother.
 "We've  bought everything new for her." 
Virtually everything else they own is somebody else's discarded rubbish, a miscellany of ramshackle furniture.
 "Watch that one," they said as I sat down on one of the armchairs, "the seat falls through." 
Small squares of a once-fitted carpet were arranged across only half of the living-room floor.
The estate is boycotted by hire firms, so they'd been forced to buy a television and washing machine new.
The council denies that this Coventry estate is a dumping ground for single parents, a denial which is contradicted by the evidence of the inhabitants.
 "We got the keys to a flat here just before my baby was born," said another woman in her early twenties, who married at sixteen because she was pregnant.
"But it was very damp and mildewed.
Then it got flooded because people had ripped out the pipes next door, which was empty too."
She couldn't bear to move in because the flat was wet and it was winter, so she went to her mother's.
Because she couldn't live in the flat, she didn't pay the rent, which meant arrears and no possibility of a transfer.
Only when she and her husband separated did she become a potential tenant in her own right.
So she was offered a second flat.
Before I moved in the ceiling got smashed in and the place was covered in water — it happens because the places are left empty.
The council told me just to stay there the weekend.
But I couldn't — when I arrived there was no door, the boards were still on the windows, there was no electricity and no cooking facilities, only cold black floors and dog shit.
I couldn't have stayed there with the baby.
The only alternative was the Salvation Army.
So I went back to my mam's.
Her mother lives in a council house with four other adolescent children, so she slept with the baby in the sitting room.
Then there was a third offer, where she now lives.
It is a ground-floor flat, one wall is a window, which keeps the place cold and which looks out onto a bare field, with two scaffolding poles and a tarmac patch.
That's where people are supposed to hang their washing, but they don't because  they're afraid it will get stolen.
Outside the window are a few sticks lying around on the grass.
"That used to be a fence, which was good because we could let the little boy play out there.
But the council pulled it down because we're not supposed to have fences."
Everything is second hand, including her clothes.
 "Watch that couch, its got a spike somewhere that sticks into you." 
She found the green carpet in a neighbouring flat, after it had been left empty.
Like her neighbours, she never goes out in the evenings, and rarely ventures off the estate which is on the edge of town.
Going anywhere is too expensive.
I met a woman, called skinny Linda, who is very, very skinny.
She is quite keen on a tenants' association.
Anyway, she had a four-year-old boy called Keith, who she never let play outside unless she was watching, because there was no defensible space.
He had a bike which she'd stopped letting him use because it had become dangerous.
Anyway, one day he shouted to her that he was taking the bike out, she was in another room doing something, and minutes later he was dead.
He got run over by an articulated lorry.
She is 25.
She used to live on another estate in Coventry, in a council house there, and was in arrears, like an awful lot of people.
And so after a month or so's arrears accumulated she got the inevitable form — an eviction notice.
It is standard procedure, and it doesn't usually mean you actually get evicted; it is a way of frightening people.
But she quit, left home because she thought she had to.
In Sunderland everybody has heard of "the courts" , the place is talked about with that combination of ignorance, fascination and repulsion which people reserve for child-molesting, torture and exotic oppression somewhere else.
Actually they're fifties maisonettes in the city's East End, there's nothing satanic about them, they're just like any block of flats you've ever seen, only worse.
 "God, what's that?" 
I said to a companion while we were wandering around the city.
 "It's the courts," she said.
They were shocking, though explaining why is difficult — just boring flats with debris lying around.
It's what's missing that is telling.
They  looked uninhabited.
There are no fences, trees, shrubs, window boxes, sheds, prams, bikes or washing lines.
There is no evidence of human habitation, only the appearance of absence.
Everything is bare, some windows are boarded up and some broken, all the signs of vacancy and abandonment.
But people do live there, though when I moved in it became clear that a third of the flats were empty.
The door at the entrance to our block had both windows smashed, and although the council was supposed to have fitted a safety lock on the door into the lobby, it hadn't.
The stairs were brushed, but pocked with scraps of eggshell and solidified tissues.
All the flats on the way up were empty and boarded up, though most of the boards had been prised open.
Not even squatters camped in this place, so more likely they'd been broken by locals scavenging for carpets or pipes.
When I first arrived at the flat and knocked on the door there was no answer.
I wandered back down the stairs, past the washing draped over the bannisters and out onto the broken glass of the yard.
This was another of those naked spaces, so exposed it was useless — putting a chair out there to sit in the sun seemed unthinkable, there were none of the nooks and crannies or spaces that invited use.
It would be like knitting in the middle of a giant car park.
Even some washhouses had been razed to stumps, people never hung their washing out.
Ball games were impossible: the yard had kitchen windows every few yards.
The kitchens faced rubbish skips three or four yards away.
Nothing grew, except weeds and slime choking all but two of the drains.
 "Hey," somebody shouted, and when I looked back, it was the tenant of the flat I'd just knocked at.
 "Come on up," she said.
I just hadn't thought — the door was never opened to callers.
Friends shouted through the letterbox.
Everybody else was a foe.
They'd be after money.
Go to almost any city and you find sink estates where you get the feeling that the council hates the place and the people too.
After years of discourtesy, the feeling is often returned by the tenants.
The poorest tenants are in the poorest accommodation, starved of resources for self-help and  political help, because their leaders are also their landlords.
A single parent living with her four children on this Sunderland estate had kept a large bedroom window covered with plastic sheeting for nearly a year; the council hadn't fixed it and she didn't have the  wherewithal to do it herself.
Only when the tenants brought the local newspaper down to see the dead rats and disrepair was the council moved to begin some repairs and rebuild the roof, but not before telling the press what it thought of its tenants.
 "Coventry's tenants are the worst in the country," blurted out a Coventry councillor, But when some of his colleagues on the council, together with fellow Labour Party activists, surveyed the extent to which repairs correctly reported had been made good by the council on several large estates, they found that 70 per cent had not been carried out.
The survey also reported hundreds more repairs which had not been reported by the pessimistic tenants.
The local Labour Party published a dossier of this record of disrepair and urged that other surveys be carried out "and the results published in an agitational way, as part of the wider demand for decent housing, run for and by the working class" .
The councillors involved were expelled from the ruling Labour Group on the council.
The repairs debacle has become a political battle symbolising the party's awkward relationship to its own supporters.
It is not only a conflict between old and new generations of activists, it symbolises a deeper malaise between the only mass party the working class has ever had and its working-class electors, who are also its clients.
The conflict also comes out of another division within the working class itself, between its respectable and upward-striving representatives and the poor, who have been dumped on the derelict estates.
Increasingly the protagonists are women.
That's because the energy for tenants' politics has always come from women, and now the emergence of women's ghettos puts poor women in the frontline with the local state.
I've been reading Richard Hoggart's The Uses of Literacy on this journey; he goes on about the working class not being able to think"abstractly, generally, metaphysically or  politically.
It conjures an image of the working-class brain cauterised at birth.
The people I'm meeting think; certainly they think locally and familially, but thoughts must operate within a world they can influence and know.
Most people can only influence the local and the familial, so if people are parochial it's probably because they're relatively powerless elsewhere.
The poor have access to neither personal nor political resources.
Subsistence incomes leave no surplus for self-help.
How can a twenty-two-year-old mother with three small children, whose stock of crockery consists of three cups and four plates, find the economic or emotional hardware to plug up the six-inch hole around the pipe running from her sink to an outside drain, or similar holes round all the pipes in her kitchen?
Where would a woman whose children possess not a single toy find the resources to restore plaster crumbling off the joists between the walls and the doors, to put five doors back on their corroded hinges and fix all the loose boards on the stairs?
The children pull them out for strangers like me, just to show how loose they are.
And what do we expect the tenants on another sink estate to do when their toilets overflow, spewing sewage from the pipes outside over their bathroom floors?
Some tenants to whom this happens every few months said they'd been told that next time they'd have to sort it out themselves.
None of these tenants have access to any tools or materials, and in some cases they've been told that they'll have to pay for the repair work.
Others would if they could, because it's common knowledge that the work won't get done otherwise.
 "Some of our employees hate tenants on the rough estates," admitted a Sunderland council official, so workmen just won't go there.
Some of the worst estates aren't the oldest, they were built in the fifties rush.
There's one in Sunderland with 2,500 dwellings; the older end is respectable, with tree-lined avenues and mature privets, and concessions to the eye in design details around the doors and windows.
The newer end is rough, treeless and spartan.
Legend has it that the "great unwashed" don't put coal in the bath any more, they burn  the doors and gates for fuel.
Citizens Band Radio calls it Matchstick City and you can see why: boarded-up houses, houses with wild shadows staining the walls where flames have leapt to the roof.
Cost-cutting experimental panels were used in these dwellings, making them highly inflammable.
There is often a stark contrast between private space for which tenants have responsibility for upkeep and the public space which are the council's responsibility.
Private space where people have some resources, is smart and well cared for, but the public spaces always seem to be mucky or breaking down.
It isn't because people don't care.
It's just that lifts only break down because people use them, rubbish  chutes only get blocked with rubbish and debris only accumulates because public spaces aren't cleaned often enough.
Densely populated estates, centralised housing management and scarce allocation of resources to public space equals wastelands.
What in any other circumstances would be counted as normal wear and tear become weapons used against the tenants.
They get the blame for the decline of their homes.
And often as not, it's the children who get the blame.
Every wanton scar defacing the walls, every time the lift breaks down or a pain of glass is broken, there's a ready-made culprit: "It's the kids again." 
It may be that the kids are moderate in their reprisals, they could do worse.
Either way, the tenants feel besieged by the authority on the one hand and their reckless juniors on the other.
But they feel the authority deserves the blame, the children they sometimes forgive.
If repairs symbolise the council's discourtesy, then arrears symbolise another dimension of the breakdown of relations between the authority and the residents.
Arrears are phenomenal in most authorities, a function of both the impoverishment of tenants and of their rebellion.
A woman on the dole in a Sunderland sink estate tells me she has only voluntarily paid rent for two weeks in three years.
"Why should I, if this is where they put you?
They can't put you anywhere worse than this."
A combination of poverty and protest.
But even this punishes the protagonists.
Arrears means no possibility  of a transfer: "We're imprisoned here." 
Arrears were to have been resolved by the introduction of the "unified housing benefit" , according to which tenants on supplementary benefit were to be relieved of responsibility for paying their rent by having it siphoned off directly by the DHSS.
Over 25,000 of Wigan's 36,000 council dwellings are on housing benefit.
In 1983, more than 46,000 out of the total 114,000 homes — public and private — in Wigan were on housing benefit.
Staggering.
The aim was to help tenants not to get into arrears.
However, like the paternalistic approach to the working class of the Peabody Trust and the Octavia Hill system of housing in the nineteenth century, which attempted to train tenants in the virtues of punctual payment and thrift by enforcing a ban on arrears, the housing benefit simply seeks to make people pay their rent by paying if for them.
This removes the tenants' choice.
Under the old system, which included rent in supplementary benefit so that tenants could pay it themselves, many tenants were able to shuffle their weekly budgets — this week buy some kids' shoes, next week the rent, this week the gas bill, next week the rent.
But with their rent paid direct this became impossible.
Subsistence incomes force the poor into improvidence — they're never able to save, or plan their purchases.
What is more or less manageable on an average wage, like paying the TV licence or buying shoes, causes a major cash flow crisis when you're living on supplementary benefit.
Furthermore, the housing benefit has removed one of the few rights of protest left to the poor tenant in terrible housing conditions — arrears.
It has wiped out, at a stroke, their right to strike.
But amidst this tale of decline and dereliction, there are havens of optimism, half-way houses to heaven.
There's a block of maisonettes in one of Coventry's most notorious rough"estates; it looks almost, but not quite, like the others around it, a grey wall of dwellings, unrelieved by the only thing which humanises most estates, whether council or private, greenery, gardens and window boxes.
This block has the distinction of a tall, geranium-red door.
As you walk through the door, however, you see something that exists  nowhere else: a secret garden.
There is an immaculately manicured lawn, a little pond surrounded by rushes, a high wall with young trees and creepers climbing up toward the wire netting at the top, beds of flowers, and, by some of the front doors, holes have been gouged out of the paving and clematis and creepers planted.
When the Tories briefly took control of the council, they implemented current Conservative philosophy — to sell council homes and encourage what for them represents the truest democracy, a property-owning democracy, which is less about one-man-one-vote than every man a home-owner.
They offered the maisonettes for sale at a peppercorn price, less than £2,000.
They were bought mainly by Labour voters, single mothers and divorced men unable to buy accommodation at market value or to find accommodation through the housing list.
They're still Labour voters.
When they acquired their homes, they persuaded the council to section off some land at the back, and that became their secret garden.
They contributed a small sum every week to buy the plants, build the pond and buy a lawn mower and two church benches, and they made their collective garden themselves.
One of the group makes his own wine, and in the summer they sit out late into the night, drinking the wine and talking.
The majority are now unemployed, resources are few, but they can manage 50p a head for the garden, and for many of them it provides the only pleasure they have in life.
Nothing, other than ownership and the secret garden, appears to distinguish them from the other tenants around them.
But that is everything — the residents of the neighbouring blocks remain tenants, and they aren't allowed to build fences or gardens.
Most of their neighbours have children, and because all the space around them is spare, it is space over which they have no control, and therefore can't use.
The real distinction doesn't lie in the fact of ownership, but in control.
There is a desultory and demoralised tenants' association on the estate, burdened by the council's unresponsiveness and its own lack of any effective sanctions.
 "What we could  do with is a bit of success," said a member of the tenants' association on a big Coventry estate.
"But god knows where you get that from.
The effect is that anybody here with get-up and go gets up and goes."
But there are success stories.
There's a cluster of old streets in central Sheffield, small terraced houses and the grand old houses built by the industrial bourgeoisie in the nineteenth century, now largely in multi-occupation.
When George Orwell went to Sheffield he visited the area and described the conditions of houses in Wallace Street.
The old slums in Wallace Street have gone now, replaced nearby by a small, neat council estate of flats and maisonettes; across the main road there's a sixties estate of dour concrete so riddled with damp and concrete corrosion that it may be demolished by the time this book is published.
The remaining web of streets was due for redevelopment — the standard solution to housing decay in the last couple of decades.
But the residents resisted and formed themselves into a community association and negotiated with the council to save their homes.
Access to urban grants and, ultimately, a sympathetic local authority, has allowed the residents to intervene in detail in the determination of the physical fabric of their lives.
They've learned to read plans, negotiate with housing agencies and councillors, and ponder long and hard on whether they want a one-way street, trees, bollards, here, or there.
If you have a road block here, what happens if you need to get an ambulance? they wonder, and then they work it out.
A derelict piece of land nearby was due for development, but the residents decided to make it into a garden.
They got the council to agree that if the authority would supply the shrubs, they would landscape the land.
Through their association, the residents have achieved what few can even dream of: self-determination not so much by individual property ownership as their association's collective control of their immediate environment.
Wigan is interesting as a small northern town, sort of happy to be a little, quiet, workers' town.
I like that.
Though still it has all the marks of makeshift industrialisation and  decline, with municipalism picking up the pieces, building endless estates of council houses.
Municipal minimalism, or, as my dad puts it, barracks and buses.
There's a housing estate built about forty years ago on a disused pit.
One day, a tenant went out to work and found a hole in his garden; hours later it was even bigger, and within yet more hours it became a twenty-foot pit.
The old shafts are subsiding, a honeycomb of holes are shifting and settling, the place feels like a slow, inverted volcano.
When the council threatened to raise the rents some of the local men started arguing about it in a local pub.
 "We started falling out over it, so we decided to form a tenants' movement," one of the tenants told me.
Word went round the local Labour Club that the tenants couldn't use its premises because they were communists.
So they got the agreement of a local pub to use one of their rooms, and started campaigning for their own community association.
One Labour councillor was sympathetic and brought his local ward committee down to see the tenants "to check it wasn't political" .
The organisation rapidly accumulated 1,000 members and began organising children's discos and bingo nights to raise money for the community association.
 "Do you know, it was like a holiday camp when we organised the disco, 400 kids turned up." 
They've also got a boxing club for about seventy boys.
Now they've been given a derelict school building, gutted by fire, for their new community association.
They have raffles on the go around all the local clubs — "On pay day, which is giro day round here." 
Together with the bingo, that's their main source of income, though now they're negotiating for government grants.
They scrounge wiring, plasterboard, wood, all kinds of building materials from local firms and are rebuilding the charred structure.
The committee which runs this elaborate web of activity includes about eight or nine people, half men, half women.
Most of them have never been involved in politics before, though all of them are Labour voters.
Despite their contest with the Labour council, they retain their loyalty.
 "Oh yes, definitely, we're all Labour round here." 
"Before, we were only a minority who complained, but with the association we  won't stand for it any more.
The Labour Club does nothing about it all.
Yes, we definitely vote Labour, and if the councillors were doing their job we wouldn't have to do all this,"said one member of this committee.
 "But we don't want the council in on it," said another,"they'd want something out of it, but we just enjoy doing it ourselves.
We get more involved in things now.
It's like life used to be, there's real community spirit."
Sometimes, Labour politicians have sought their electors' views, but usually only to ratify completed plans.
A veteran local government leader in Coventry who went into city politics from the car factories where he was a militant shop steward, remembers an attempt to communicate with electors after the Second World War:
We had a vision of a brave new Britain and a brave new Coventry.
We'd been heavily blitzed and this gave us the opportunity to think big and boldly and to think philosophically.
There was a Klondike atmosphere.
We approached it with a will to get things done with socialist thinking.
The central area development came relatively easily.
We went to the government to mark 430 acres of prime property.
But the government was overridden by the Treasury, we only got 270 acres.
And the central area plan was circumscribed by the rights of the city's main shops.
 "But anyway we believed in buying land and that the municipality ought to have a share, that the community ought to have a share in the equity of real estate." 
And then came the building of the mass housing estates.
"We wanted to try to involve the community in influencing town planners.
So we had thirty-nine public meetings to take into account what ordinary men and women wanted."
Did they learn much from those meetings?
"No, they didn't tell us much; we told them.
But it did cultivate good will."
Compare that with the mushrooming of tenants' housing co-ops in Liverpool, in the face of Labour Party opposition.
People living in slums due for redevelopment would normally expect to be rehoused on rambling estates around the periphery of the city.
But people living in an old street of Victorian  back-to-backs in the middle of Liverpool 8, riot territory, wanted to stay together and wanted to have some say in what they live in.
If housing associations could organise coops, so could they.
So they set about it, with the help of a co-op development agency, which provided them with management services.
They learned to negotiate for grants, find a patch of land, buy it, hire their own architect, and then work on detailed plans for their own homes, the colour of bricks, the design of window frames, the landscaping of their estate.
It's built now, and it's beautiful.
Tenants living in a ramshackle tenement in the middle of a cosmopolitan district of Liverpool 8 were, likewise, due for redevelopment.
They, too, formed a housing co-op rather than be dispersed to the outer edges in identikit "corpy" houses.
They meet regularly in the newly built Chinese community centre.
At the meeting I attend, the architect they hired brings his model of the site and their homes.
A long discussion takes place about details of design.
The tenants don't want to be hurried into any decisions, so they sit quietly and listen.
 "Don't hassle us," says a middle-aged white woman in the co-op.
She is sitting next to her neighbour, a black woman who was born in the tenements and whose brother lived nearby.
He, too, was a member of the co-op.
 "This is the rest of our lives we're talking about, you know," she says, to collective, silent assent.
When the tea break comes everybody rushes to the model, holding their cups over the plan.
A huddle gathers round one street where one house was several yards behind the line of the street.
They call the architect over.
"Why's that house behind the others?
Can't they all be together?"
The architect explains his reasoning and says he thinks the tenant might enjoy the privacy.
 "Privacy!" they laugh"What do we want that for?
We live with each other anyway!"
The black woman scoffed confidentially and points to one of the younger women.
 "I laid her mother out," she says.
There are nearly twenty co-ops in the city now, all of them involving the tenants in deep and detailed commitment both to the planning and to each other.
One co-op met several  nights a week for three years.
Now they're not just tenants, they're experts.
Though most of the tenants are probably Labour voters, the local Liberals and Tories have supported the co-ops.
For obvious reasons, the tenants absolve the local authority of responsibility.
The Labour Party is opposed to them because they challenge the principles of state housing and of equal access to a democratic minimum.
Labour authorities have a tendency to disarm tenants.
They want them to be more responsible, more self-determining, to take matters into their own hands, and yet they oppose the only thing the tenants have of their own — organisation.
That's because they see it as a threat to their political authority as the only representative of the people.
In touring Northern England George Orwell saw the era of state housing moving into its expansionist phase and beginning to transform the urban landscape.
The eighties is the end of that era, with the Labour Party hoist on its own identification with a housing form which was borrowed from ideological sources which were never formulated by and for the working class itself.
So, it's stuck with defending this form of public housing in the face of mass dissidence within the working class itself, not so much with the principle of council housing as the tenants' lack of control over design and management.
That contradiction has left the party divided within itself and divided from its own constituency — the working class.
It is exemplified in the resistance of councillors to tenants' own mobilisation.
 "Yes, we've got a terrible profile on repairs," said a Coventry councillor, formerly of the Left but driven into the arms of her old protagonists on the right of the party by other Left councillors' support for tenants.
I've got this gut reaction.
I represent areas with stinking housing estates.
Those people are in a housing misery situation, and people will write papers and dossiers about it — but they won't get the repairs done.
That offends me.
I'm not denying people's right to do it, but politics is about power, and suppose the Social Democratic Party moved in and swept the board, what would we do then?
I remember a tenants' association was set up and they demanded  that we meet them.
They'd brought a poor young woman with a baby in a pushchair and we traipsed all around, in and out of houses, it was bitterly cold, and at the end of the exercise I felt we could have saved a hell of a lot of time.
If they'd come straight to me we could have quietly got it done.
Why make such awful examples of those people?
It was conflict's sake, what the tenants association didn't want was a solution, it wanted a lovely, publicity-generating conflict.
Stunts.
When all they needed to do was lift up the phone and have a quiet word.
The problem is when you talk about organising the tenants, who are you organising them against?
We thought we were building a new Jerusalem, but these people seem hell bent on destroying Babylon.
Housing offers the greatest opportunity of all for local self-determination.
Perhaps the crisis in public housing gives concrete evidence of something the Left longs for — the marriage of representative democracy through the institutions of the state with tenants and residents exercising direct democracy in defining and managing the community's homes.
But if the Labour Party is to survive the consequences of its defence of bad housing, it is going to have to surrender the belief that it is the only voice of the people.
Its future depends on a different kind of alliance with the class that created it who won't for much longer be reduced to the status of clients dependent on the whim of their political godfathers.
Mothers on the Rock and Roll
…the working class think nothing of getting married on the dole.
It annoys old ladies in Brighton, but it is proof of their essential good sense…families are impoverished but the family system has not broken up.
George Orwell,The Road to Wigan Pier 
Women are the poorest of all.
Women are responsible for family finances but they have none of the power that goes with possession.
Having it in their hands never made money their own.
A flinch of recognition flits across women's eyes when it comes to men and money.
Sexual inequality describes their experience of the political economy of the heterosexual family, it's an open secret.
Yet while we readily blame employers for their extra exploitation of women as cheap labour, and the state for regulating women's economic dependence on men, we protect men from the shame of their participation in women's poverty by keeping the secret.
Family budgets are seen to be a private settlement of accounts between men and women, men's unequal distribution of working-class incomes within their households is a right they fought for within the working-class movement and it is not yet susceptible to public political pressure within the movement.
It's no good measuring poverty by averaging out the incomes of people living on state benefits, we also have to describe the differential between the sexes, enforced by the employers, and state and last but not least by men.
Forty years ago a Sunderland shirt-maker married a shipyard  pattern-maker.
The shirt-maker gave up her job, and they both lived on the pattern-maker's relatively high pay.
I don't know how much he earns.
It used to be murder talking about it.
He gives me £54 a month and I have to pay all the bills out of that It used to bother me at first, it doesn't now.
We've got a joint bank account, but I don't use it.
He'd cut my fingers off if I used it.
Another elderly woman in Sheffield who occasionally spends her afternoons playing dominoes in a community centre, where we met, says she's never had her own money.
Does she buy anything for herself?
Once a year she gets her hair permed and once a year she buys face powder.
What else?
 "Curling pins and clothes now and again, not a lot though, I make do." 
Apart from domino afternoons, she never sees friends, never goes out, never goes to meetings.
"I used to be active in the church but not now, there used to be hell on if I did things in the church.
We never go out together.
We get ice cream every Friday — that's my treat.
He says I should be thankful,"she says, and all the players laugh.
Then it's quiet again and one of them murmurs, "Aye, that's how it is." 
An 85-year-old Wigan pensioner is now looked after by her daughter — the mother applied for a grant for the daughter, because she is immobilised by arthritis.
It was turned down.
She's never had a wage "I never worked — he wouldn't let me, though I'd have like to." 
The day we met her diet was soup at dinner time, pineapple and cottage cheese for tea with a packet of crisps and a cup of tea.
It's old ladies who show all the signs of a long life on subsistence, though they wouldn't necessarily see themselves as having been poor, because their husbands weren't necessarily poor.
I spent a wonderful afternoon with some women pensioners in Barnsley.
They wear macs in mid-winter: many never had winter coats.
For them, getting a winter coat was a big thing, it was to many working-class women what getting a car is to many men.
No winter boots — everything has to be all-purpose, for all seasons.
One eats meat once a week, and only two ever ate fresh fruit.
Their  handbags are shopping bags, their holidays are day trips, and occasionally going to a son or daughter.
Often they say, they had no friends until they become old women, widows.
Widow's liberation.
None had worked after they married, except "little" jobs now and again.
Some had never had a job because they'd looked after their mams and dads.
Most never knew how much their husbands had earned.
Although they're among the poorest people in the community, many feel better off than they've ever been — they've got money, time and friends of their own for the first time.
Today's generation of old women may be the last to live a lifetime of socially accepted wagelessness.
Their daughters now in their sixties, fifties and forties, were the post-war generations of married women who found their way back into waged work, who disrupted the equation between the breadwinner and masculinity which has been inscribed in both the wage system and in the state's system of income support.
And now the sense is spreading in the old industrial communities that wives with "wee jobs" are becoming breadwinners.
They may be the sole earners in households where men and teenage children are all unemployed.
Although mass unemployment has hit women badly, not least those women with the "wee jobs" , the fact is that the pattern of unemployment is unevenly distributed.
Sex segregation in the labour market puts men and women in different jobs, often in different workplaces, susceptible to different impact as the recession bites.
The dramatic collapse of work in steel and cars and shipbuilding, for example, has largely affected men because these industries were large employers of mainly men.
But there is another factor.
The massive increase of employment among married women in peacetime has changed the culture we all inhabit and the legal rights of women.
Of course, that hasn't happened without resistance: married women's re-entry into the labour market was usually conditional — it was designed not to disturb women's primary responsibility for domestic work.
So although women's-relationship to wages and work changed, men's didn't.
Not  surprisingly, part-time women were usually left to management's mercies and when recession struck they were usually the first to go.
But the fact remains, something is afoot in English society which has prevented the promotion of a back-to-the-kitchen-sink strategy to meet mass unemployment.
When documents from the Conservative Cabinet's Family Policy Group were leaked in 1983, they revealed that the then Employment Secretary Norman Tebbit believed women should abandon waged work and return to their homes.
But that belief did not, and could not, find expression in the official policy of his party.
While the Conservative Party claims to be the party of national consensus, the common sense party, it is both the architect of common sense values and the prisoner of them.
No party would now dare go to the voters promising a prohibition on women's right to work and to a wage.
So, times have changed.
But the phenomena of women breadwinners is in no way equivalent to the experience of the male breadwinners — the new breadwinners are poorer, the legacy of a wage system based on women's economic dependence.
The failure to equalise men and women's earnings leaves households headed by women poorer than they would be if the breadwinner were a man: In Sheffield I met an assistant in a hospital clinic.
She takes home £201 a month.
She keeps her boyfriend, who has been unemployed for four years.
A couple of times a month she has a drink with the women at work, which is the only time she goes out.
She pays £12.50 a week for a one room flat, so the couple are constantly in each other 's company.
 "He gets depressed and then he'd rather shout at me than talk to me." 
She has no winter coat or boots and she eats meat once a week,"and by the end of the month it'll be beans on toast or a can of soup between us.
The women here are paid pin-money, but we are breadwinners.
A Coventry school-dinner lady in her late fifties, like many women of her generation, carries with her part of their collective memory of poor old times.
"I've worked all my life, I've never not worked, even if it was housework, and I haven't a  penny in the bank.
I've worked all these years and I've got nothing.
When I started this job in school dinners I earned £7 a week.
Now I bring home £70.
It's no different."
During the summer of 1982 she drew £400 holiday pay during a six-week school break.
She put by the rent for the six weeks, and laid out everything for the bills — she usually pays £6 a week for gas, £2.68 newspapers, £2 club for her son's clothes, £30 for food, £2.75 for school dinners in term time.
By the time she has budgeted for these basics she has £50 left for the six-week holiday.
Her husband has been out of work for three years, but her life as the breadwinner was quite unlike his.
She, and many of the women like her whom I met, still does all the housework, just like before, and on top of that has to manage the effect of her husband's traumatic discovery of something women have always known — what it feels like to be economically dependent.
Another school-dinner lady in Wigan told me a typical tale:
We had a terrible time when my husband was made redundant five years ago.
He was in a rotten mood for months.
Even now, five years later, I've got to be ever so careful — because he feels it's my money we live on.
The other day he was ratty and saying "all I hear is you are the breadwinner and we've got to be careful, we can't have this or that because we can't afford it" .
I saved up for us to have a holiday, I booked a caravan and paid the coach fares and then on the morning we were due to go he said, "I'm not going without a penny in my pocket, I can't, I can't." 
Up to the eleventh hour he wouldn't go.
Men's economic dependency seems to face many women with a contradiction over housework — they need the men to change, and yet they feel the need to protect men in crisis.
Only rarely did they talk of their men willingly taking over the housework and servicing their breadwinner wives.
A hospital cleaner in Barnsley works part-time because she's got two small children, taking home £26.50 for seventeen hours.
Her husband is a steel erector on short-time: six weeks off and two weeks on.
When he's off he qualifies for  unemployment benefit, which makes their joint income £49 a week plus child benefit.
Until the 1982 health service dispute, she'd never been involved in a trade union, nor had she ever gone to any meetings about anything.
But during the dispute she became a shop steward.
He didn't support our strikes and we used to row about it, but not now.
Because we could row for ever and a day, so we've decided not to.
Anyway, he knows I'm not going to back down.
And I like the job, the women are great and I believe in what we're fighting for.
Now that he's on short time he's doing more round the house.
I used to do it all, I had complete control of the house, now the situation has changed completely.
A cleaner in a Sheffield hospital has four teenage children, all unemployed and all living at home, and an unemployed husband.
She takes home £38 for nearly thirty hours.
She says:
My husband does a bit of housework.
He didn't do it before and he doesn't like it, but he does a bit.
I'm the breadwinner and it looks like it will stay that way.
Mind you, it gets me down sometimes — I'm getting out to work every day and they're there sitting around.
Another hospital cleaner in Sunderland takes home £35 a week.
Her husband is on short-time and two sons are unemployed.
Me being at work causes friction at home.
I'll get back from work and one of our boys is just getting up, or another day they'll all be just sat there, and you'll find all the bread's gone.
I've had to get a padlock to lock it away.
If I buy three tins of beans I lock two away.
The other boy will mash tea a dozen times a day — your house becomes a transport cafe.
There's another kind of breadwinner — women on their own with no regrets.
A psychiatric nurse I talked to in Sheffield works twenty-eight hours and takes home £51 to keep herself and two children.
Rent is £11.50 a week, rates £4.60, newspapers 75p, gas £8, milk £4, electricity £1, children's clothes  club £5.
That leaves £17 for food and the rest of life topped up by Family Income Supplement.
I put everything in piles.
What's left goes on food — sometimes it's only £15.
So the thing is, sometimes you just don't eat.
I very rarely go out except to union branch meetings — they get me out and they cost nowt.
Now I grow all my own vegetables — it's surprising what you can do.
And I've enjoyed having the kids on my own.
I've been going out with a bloke for about ten years, but I wouldn't marry him — I'd have to be in to make his tea!
And I love working, it's like home from home.
Next to my kids my work is the most important thing in my life.
No sooner had the women's liberation movement moved from the sixties to the seventies than it saw the economic conditions for its demands evaporate.
By the eighties this produced a panic that the political conditions for feminism were disappearing, too.
But they haven't.
So much for the notion held among some people on the Left that politics is only an expression of economics.
But although the impact of women's liberation remains resilient in the culture, a question remains: given the assumption that the road to liberation lay, among other things, in women's economic independence, what happens when employment ceases to be an alternative "destiny" ?
The answer is a baby boom.
Mothers who took time out from employment for motherhood in the seventies thinking they'd go back to work later, find there isn't work to go back to.
Many of them are having more babies.
And in the eighties, unemployed girls who've never experienced economic independence are doing the only thing they can — having babies, either getting married or not, but often staying with their mam and dad, and quite soon getting a council house.
They never consider an abortion, often don't use contraception.
They want children.
Of course they do.
There isn't anything else.
Being a mother has a certain status after all, it makes you a grown-up person, something you can't feel, if, like a girl I met in Barnsley, you leave school, which you hated anyway, and did badly at, become unemployed, and there's no job except perhaps a  government scheme.
She became a painter and decorator on a government scheme for a year.
She said she really liked it, but wouldn't have carried on doing it.
She didn't know why.
Now she's twenty, and has a five-month-old baby.
Her friend told me that this baby wants for nothing, it is the best dressed baby In the neighbourhood.
She lives with her mam and dad, a cleaner and welder respectively, and does a bit of housework, though her mam still does the cooking, and she goes out once a week.
Of course she doesn't appear in the unemployment statistics because she doesn't register every week.
Already you can anticipate the grumblings of protest against sex on the dole, taxpayers' money wasted on profligate and promiscuous girls weakened by the welfare state and women's liberation.
But if motherhood is for them some sort of liberation, it isn't in the image of the "liberated lady" stereotype, Cosmo girl, sexy, single, childless and employed.
That stereotype speaks less for women's liberation than a society which treats children as a disruptive influence, a social nuisance.
Women's liberation doesn't promote emulation of men's separation from children but a challenge to that peculiar public apartheid between men and children.
It is about motherhood and independence and it is about having women and children in society, not exiled from it.
Motherhood and dependence was the knot women's liberation tried to untie, but the baby boom among many of the young, unemployed mothers I met suggests that, rather than these young women being in retreat, something more complex and contradictory is abroad.
When they're still young, girls hang around bus stations, leisure centres, bus shelters or each other 's doorsteps.
A gang of girls I met in Coventry hanging around with some boys who, like them, were unemployed, said that when they were younger they did a bit of vandalising: "When I got pissed I smashed the windows of posh houses," said one of them.
Her friend said,"I don't do things without a reason, only when I've got something against people, so we did things like spraying walls, not bus seats, we didn't slash them because people have to sit on them.
But we smashed a bus shelter  once just for something to do."
A third friend said, "One time I used to go around with a load of boys who wanted to break people's windows, so I just left." 
If they were working they'd be going to discos, but because they can't work they stay at home, and because they're girls they do the housework, though they feel they are doing somebody else's housework.
 "I do all the housework and the cooking, my mam and dad both work," said an unemployed teenager in Coventry.
"I don't like beefburgers and things, so now and again I do proper cooking, like stews and puddings — that's the only exciting thing I do.
I go to the pub a bit, but I haven't got the money, or I see my boyfriend, or I keep my mam company."
For most of them sex happens in the same places it always did.
 "We do it in fields, or up alleys, or at parties — that's the best." 
The girls said some of them were on the pill, others weren't because their mams and dads don't know and they daren't go to the family planning clinic.
They have no place of their own — either because they can't afford the Ritzy redoubts of the youth culture, or because home is a place where you're in the way.
The only place left is the streets, and street life either costs money, or is dangerous.
Hard-line street life doesn't sit easily with the girls' culture, and for all their stylish revolt, in the end the only way to belong seems to be to be part of the community of women.
Faced with the alternatives of the dole, or the angry aggravation of the streets, motherhood brings a sense of belonging.
More important, it offers a transition from immaturity made permanent by poverty, to a state of maturity.
So, one of the first things you notice in Northern cities hit by unemployment is babies, lots of babies, with very young parents.
Unemployed men in denims and trainers pushing buggies.
The sight of teenage fathers is striking because it is in such stark contrast with the role of their own fathers, who weren't seen pushing prams when they were nineteen.
You don't notice the young mothers so readily, because they're doing what they've always done.
The real change is that many are doing it alone.
Men.
come and go in their lives, but  there is no necessary connection between motherhood and marriage.
They are going it alone not only because they happened to "get caught out" , but because it is an alternative to aimless adolescence on the dole.
 "I always wanted to have a child," said a nineteen-year-old woman living on a Sunderland housing estate with her parents.
Youth unemployment there has reached 50 per cent.
"Having a baby makes me feel a lot older and more mature.
At first my mam and dad weren't pleased about me falling pregnant, and they used to go on about how was I going to manage.
The bloke denied it was his, I felt awful, though there's plenty have kids on their own round here.
In fact the majority fall pregnant and don't get married."
After leaving school at sixteen, she went on a government course, painting and decorating, but after it finished she was unemployed.
 "I went to the careers office — nothing." 
She then got a factory job, earning between £30 and £40, for four months.
Did she consider an abortion?
 "It just doesn't seem right." 
And what about sex, does she like it?
 "Well, it's not everything it's cracked up to be." 
She does it "now and again" and never masturbates.
Now, everything she's got goes on the baby.
That's out of an income of £25 social security and £5.25 child benefit.
Older mothers watch their daughters becoming mothers with a wry recognition.
 "Oh, they love it when the kids are babies, dressing them up and looking after them, everybody loves babies, but it's different when they get older," they say.
One of the women on this Sunderland estate told me they all recognised the drive: "It's part of becoming a member of the community instead of just a reckless teenager.
You don't need to get a job, when you're a mam.
When you're a mam somebody need you."
In many working-class communities, particularly in the Northeast, women were never offered much in the way of waged work anyway and the girls feel that their own mothers gave birth when they were teenagers, so what's the difference?
The difference is that more and more are having their babies at home with their own mothers and not with their men.
But some have them alone.
A mother in her early  twenties in Coventry, who has been unemployed for most of the time since leaving school, said:
I wanted to get pregnant because I couldn't cope living at home.
I wanted something of my own.
So it was a way of getting out and I knew that eventually the council would have to rehouse me.
A lot of people think that round here, several of us did it in my street because we wanted to get away.
My family weren't bad, we were just overcrowded.
Five out of seven girls in my street got pregnant without being married.
Two got married later.
And we all got council flats nearby.
Life's easier on my own, I was lucky to get away.
But it's a road riddled with paradoxes.
They are lonely and they are poor.
Though if you're young and poor the surest guarantee of a council house is parenthood, only because the housing cataclysm of the fifties and sixties produced cold, damp deserts that no one else wants to live on.
The young mothers take up the local authorities' slack stock.
The place I got, I used to hate going to bed — it was so damp, I had to listen to it dripping off the curtains.
I had to wring them out in the mornings.
For five months I slept with the baby, it was so cold.
And I couldn't let him outside because there was a river just by.
So half the time I felt like killing him, and I got  agoraphobia , because I was so depressed.
I couldn't face seeing people.
I had to go upstairs to tell the woman above that I was using the bathroom, because if she walked about above, the plaster fell off.
One day a big bit of plaster fell off and hit him on the head.
And the plaster was falling off in our bedrooms.
A single mother I met in Sheffield has got housing, but in a Dickensian block of flats, on the fifth floor, with no lift, a damp kitchen, bathroom and hall where the wallpaper seems to stand up only out of inertia because it isn't sticking to the walls.
There is no place for the child to play.
"One day a neighbour opposite came to tell me my little boa was hanging over the other side of the railings on our landing.
So after that I would never let him out to play, but then a social  worker came to complain that I was keeping him in and away from other children."
How do those young dole-queue mothers manage?
A single parent living with her parents gets supplementary benefit of £5.25 child benefit.
If she moves into a council home of her own, her rent is paid direct through the unified housing benefit.
Her cash income remains the same, but she has to stock her new home on that and whatever grants she can secure from social security for domestic hardware.
These are increasingly hard to get — a Coventry welfare rights centre had so many claimants complaining that they'd not received their statutory entitlement to maternity grants that the centre has printed a special complaints form.
Fuel is these young mothers' greatest problem: it takes a large chunk of their small income, and many mothers are also housed on estates with either excessive heating costs or minimal heating provisions, which forces them to use expensive alternatives.
Many of the single mothers I met had accumulated massive fuel debts of £300, and had had spells without gas or electricity or both.
A young woman living in a semi-detached house on an unpopular Sheffield estate showed me a letter she'd just received from the electricity board: "A board employee will…call at your premises to cut off the electricity supply on 9/11/82.
If the board fails to gain entry it will use the law to gain entry to your premises."
The bill was for £19.23.
 "I know I'll be all right because there's a few steps to go before it gets to that," she said, "but some of the lasses wouldn't know that." 
These mothers may seek maturity through maternity, but that's not the same as domesticity — they aren't into being earth mothers, mega-chefs or craftswomen.
The poor, however, are often blamed for their own poverty, accused of budgeting badly or living beyond their means.
But good budgeting means having a budget in the first place, having a surplus beyond merest subsistence with which to plan, bulk buy, meet the emergencies which crop up constantly.
The  speed at which things wear out and break down rises fast when everything you own is cheap.
There's an unseemly haste among people who don't have to live on £25 a week to suggest how they could do it better, manage on a minimum and feed the 5,000.
Facing people with the budgets of the poor often prompts the response, "why don't they make soup?" or "Fresh vegetables are cheaper than fish fingers." 
But are they?
Compare a typical fast-food meal for four with several suggestions offered by people who wouldn't resort to fish fingers.
(See price comparison on page 70).
In an era of fast food, subsistence incomes don't make for a culinary culture.
The mass production and marketing of family food expresses the dissolution of domesticity as a way of life.
Beanz Meanz Heinz exemplifies this, it is represented as children's food and it is the moment of consumption which is celebrated, not the process of its production.
It's functional and cheap and takes the work out of mothers' work — the opposite of the colour supplements' fascination with food and its production and the backlash against junk food, which present a chic counterculture of cooking not as work but as leisure and pleasure.
But for the poor, food is always functional: "It just fills a hole doesn't it?" said one single mother, "I can't stand watching television because it depresses me, there's always food on." 
It's never the endless toast and tea, beans, bread and chips which are the staples of poor people's diets.
 "Toast, I look like a piece of toast." 
Then there's the notion that poverty is mitigated by "doing it yourself" .
Of course it is.
But this doesn't take into account the capital equipment you need if you're to be self-sufficient.
Nineteen-year-old mothers don't have sewing machines, mixers, liquidisers, mincers, drills, paint brushes, The Readers Digest Book of Home Decorating.
Often they don't have even baking tins, or enough pans.
And only half have that most ubiquitous machine, the washing machine, according to a Child Poverty Group survey carried out with the Family Services Unit in 1981.
The cost of launderettes is prohibitive on a subsistence income — so the washing gets done in the sink.
The single parent building a home on    supplementary benefit doesn't have the tools acquired by workers who've been earning for twenty or forty years.
So the new wave of mothers exemplify the separation between maternity and domesticity already entrenched in working-class culture since married women reentered the labour market after the Second World War.
Theirs is a rebellious motherhood, it's not an uncritical retreat into traditional femininity.
But as a resourceless rebellion it also produces isolation and dependency.
If motherhood includes them in the community of women, poor parenthood also excludes them from the public culture of their own generation.
 "I got fed up of seeing people 1 knew getting dressed up and going to pubs or discos, because I couldn't and I didn't know what the latest was — and round here that matters a lot," said a nineteen-year-old Wigan woman with a child.
When it is youth culture above all which makes the pace and claims to define what is public pleasure, young single mothers, like young married sisters, are excluded.
Their live are entirely private.
Exclusion extends from pleasure to work.
If having babies is partly a response to unemployment, it also becomes one of the causes of continuing unemployment.
Single parents off the dole queue have the same thwarted desire for waged work as their married sisters — a Woman's Realm survey in the seventies found that 70 per cent of mothers full time at home would like a job, but had none because of the lack of childcare facilities.
In the eighties, the prime reason is that there are no jobs, and for the few available, single mothers aren't equal competitors in the jobs market.
A Coventry woman I met who had her child when she was eighteen said she had been "on the rock and roll" since she was sixteen.
I hated being on social security and I tried everywhere for a job.
At the Job Centre they were a bit funny about me going on government schemes because I had the baby, but I did get on one eventually.
My mam looked after the baby and I did a job on a scheme looking after old people.
I got up at six, spent all day cleaning other people's houses, from 8.30 a.m. until 4.30, with half an hour for dinner, for  £25.
I did that for a year until the scheme finished.
At least it felt like it was my own money and I was working for it.
Lack of childcare facilities not only blocks a job, even if there were one, it prevents single parents doing anything else to prepare themselves for a changing job market.
A twenty-one-year-old mother living alone with her child on a Sunderland estate became pregnant the first she "had sexual intercourse" .
Having passed seven CSE's at school, she said,"I reckoned that if I had a future then computer studies was where it would be.
So I went to night classes at the college to do O levels.
But after my mam died I had nobody to look after the baby, so I couldn't go any more."
Many of the old industrial communities have long been a desert for women's employment.
After the Second World War some became the sites of new industries located there specifically to draw on work-hungry women, but that respite lasted only two or three decades.
The clothing and electronics factories have closed down in the Northeast, and the shifts specially designed for mothers, the part-time and twilight, were the first to go.
But even they were no use to the unmarried mothers without fathers to mind the babies.
The remaining jobs, cleaning or semi-skilled work in small factories which are surviving the recession, pay pin-money wages that assume that someone else, a man, is the breadwinner.
They're not viable for women who are their own breadwinners.
In Sunderland a single parent in her late teens told me.
"I worked in a factory making bingo books.
It was winter, I'd go in when it was pitch dark at 8 a.m. and come out again in the dark at 5.30 pm, still in the dark.
We had Friday afternoons off and for that job I got £16 a week."
It wasn't enough to pay the rent, never mind to live on.
For women on supplementary benefit, the economic benefits of having a part-time job, all they can manage without full-time childcare, are somewhat illusory, because it is taken off their benefit.
 "If I was full time, I'd be taking home £40 a week," said a Sheffield hotel worker who is also a single parent.
"But I can only work nine hours, three nights a week, and I take  home £10.20.
That counts against my social security."
What about the absent presence — men.
The mothers' courage in going it alone doesn't seem to draw on any new feelings so much as old ones.
And it's less an explicit critique of men than a consensus shared between women — they share it as much with their grandmothers as with women's liberation.
Women have always felt both complaint and commitment about domestic life with men — the difference is that today they can do something about that contradiction.
A seventy-two-year-old Barnsley woman married a miner when she was twenty-one; she describes the contradiction:
When we got married there were no wedding cakes, no wedding do's, you were just glad to get married, you thought you were going to be better off, but really you'd no idea.
Such a pity.
The furniture you got was just little bits and pieces you could get hold of, and you had to go into debt for it.
The men worked, but they often drank away what they worked for.
All they cared about was drink.
They didn't care about the home.
You just thought this was your life, you just put up with it.
The majority were like that.
The men worked hard and as you got on in life you just thought this was home, although you hadn't the luxuries.
As long as you had your mam!
We hadn't a lot of room for enjoyment.
Television was a marvellous thing, it shows you a bit on life, you'd never know all these things otherwise.
And nurseries, they're good, aren't they?
I always had to have mine with me, you got no babysitters then, you'd got nowt.
I dragged mine everywhere.
The men were too busy working or having their enjoyment, or in bed — that's been life!
It shouldn't be like that.
They used to torture women in them days, you know.
But now women can just leave.
You couldn't leave them in those days because there was no social security.
It was worse than if you'd been single — you'd no friends.
Married women just stayed in their own house.
And when the men were in the house they were in bed.
When they were out, they were out for a drink.
I always knew how much he earned, because he used to give me his pay note and I'd to go down and collect it.
You got your own wages out of that and he kept the rest.
I'd have liked a job but you couldn't, because the men had to be looked after, you just had to be  there.
And anyway he wouldn't have stood for it — a woman running round and doing things on her own.
I never had anything to do with the Co-op Women's Guilds or the Labour Party.
He makes me vote Labour.
I'm not up in all that, I'm not in the higher class, I just vote because he wants me to.
And I didn't go to the women's guilds because I didn't have the knowledge.
But it's different now, women can leave and have different men.
A twenty-year-old Sunderland woman living in a council house on her own with two children, told me,"My boyfriend kept giving me a hiding.
I wasn't very happy about that so I finished with him.
He'd just come in and say, "You fucking frigid cow," and all that.
But that's a regular thing up here in the Northeast.
Only about two of my mates don't get a hiding.
But I wouldn't put up with it."
They know they don't have to endure it, and they know, too, that they don't have to get married.
They may want men in their lives, but they know they don't necessarily need them.
That makes the difference.
The men are trapped too, though.
They're young and poor and the patriarchal culture they inherit and the conspicuous consumption of their contemporaries sanctions their irresponsibility.
Nonetheless, when they're there, living in, the nice little brown envelope with the weekly giro cheque arrives in their name; and when they go the authorities depend on the dependents to pay off the debts.
Of course, some young fathers are fascinated by their babies and enjoy cohabiting co-operatively, finding more"meaning in being fathers than their own fathers did.
Parenthood promises them the same as the women — a future.
What about sex?
Has anything changed for the single mothers of the eighties?
Ever since the Pill revolution of the sixties, it's been taken for granted that the only obstacle to women's enthusiasm for heterosexual sex — fear of pregnancy — has been removed.
The Pill was to be for the sexual revolution what steam was to the industrial revolution.
It seemed to be the perfect solution — contraception without  constraining the fountain of male pleasure.
But this conflates two issues — pleasure and pregnancy — when they are in fact separate.
Sexology and psychology throughout the twentieth century has been preoccupied with heterosexuality's problem — women.
Only women's liberation, coming out of the decade of the Pill, permissiveness and the sexual revolution, inverted the question — women's problem was heterosexuality.
The Pill was as much about men's sexual liberation as it ever was about women's, because it purged their fear of paternity.
The Pill seemed to symbolise the free woman — sexy and single, and so it seemed to prefigure the women's liberation movement's quest for pleasure and independence.
But sexy and single didn't mean equal, and it didn't mean independent.
The assumption that once women had freedom from fear of pregnancy they'd like men and they'd like sex, just like that, meant neither sex nor men nor the economics of women's powerlessness had to change.
The sexual revolution escalated the pressure and helped remove the prohibitions on sex, but changed neither the form nor the content.
It took women's liberation to politicise women's discontent with sex and men, but how far has that reached the young mothers inside the traditional working-class communities of the industrial North?
"Sex?
I just felt pressured, it was all the bloody time, "You can't love me if you won't do it, everybody is doing it." "
 "I didn't enjoy it," said a woman who became pregnant when she was sixteen.
 "He kept telling me I couldn't get pregnant the first time, but I did." 
 "We do it once or twice a week," said a woman with two children whose boyfriend comes over to stay.
Does she like it?
"Sometimes, it all depends on what's gone on during the day.
I used to before — when there was nothing bothering me."
Did she get what she wanted?
"No, it's just something to do.
It's just because you feel affection from someone else."
Did she masturbate?
 "No." 
Had she heard of the clitoris?
 "No." 
Had she heard of orgasms?
 "No, only slang words." 
A nineteen-year-old Coventry woman who disowned any interest in feminism or politics — "I'm just a fun girl," — said she could never remember anybody talking  about"the clitoris or orgasms'.
Did sex always involve penetration?
 "Mostly, but not always." 
Did she ever experience the magic moment equivalent to his ejaculation?
 "No." 
Fantasies?
 "No." 
Masturbation?
 "Never, not ever, never fancied it." 
Today the young mothers on supplementary benefit hang on to the hopes that sex will be pleasurable and cohabitation will be companionable, but they often aren't and they're resigned to disappointment.
Men come and go in their lives.
When a man lives in, a woman's independence — her own name on the weekly giro — is automatically surrendered.
The men become the claimants and the women their dependants.
They lose control over both the revenue and the expenditure, often with catastrophic results: rent not paid, fuel bills missed, arrears mounting.
It is conventional wisdom among advice agencies, local authorities and fuel boards that it's the women who pick up the tab for men's mismanagement.
I heard a housing association official who visited a northern Women's Aid refuge for battered women being asked if she could help a woman who'd just arrived, eight months' pregnant, with two black eyes, find a place on her own.
She said,"I've rehoused women on their own before.
Away from the influence of the husbands they cope remarkably well."
Who knows what will happen?
Will unemployment hasten the domestication of men?
People seem to assume that it will, but although women may expect it, there's nothing coming from the men's movement, the working men's clubs, the trade unions and the Labour Party to encourage that transition.
Among the women themselves there's the feeling that you hope for the best and expect the worst, a deep pessimism that patriarchy rules and scarpers without paying the bills.
For feminists like me, who live through the political processes of women's liberation, which turns sex inside out and reforms relationships with men, even if it doesn't revolutionise them, talking to these young, single mothers proves that gains won in sexual relationships are not necessarily permanent or universal.
It's an encounter with women  on the edge of transition, discontented and yet disarmed.
Sex hasn't changed, men haven't changed enough and motherhood shrouded in poverty is what it always was — gains and losses.
For me, this seemed to be symbolised in the living room of a teenage parent living in one of Coventry's worst housing estates.
It was a home, her own home, even though everything was scavenged second hand, except for some net curtains, a coffee table and a picture on the wall above the mantelpiece.
It was the only decoration in the room, a picture that hangs over thousands of  mantelpieces , bought in a chain store.
There were no other pictures, no photographs of weddings, babies and holidays, no parade of faces across a china cabinet or TV, no chronicle of births, deaths and marriages, nothing to be nostalgic about.
The painting showed a child's face with a teardrop falling like a pearl from its cheek, an ecstasy of agony, a secular martyr.
The picture bore no relation to the blotchy, snotty, shouting face of angry childhood.
It was utterly serene, with no sign of rebellion, no struggle.
It wasn't a real child, it was a mature face with the wisdom of hindsight passively bearing the pain of the past.
Meanwhile an ebullient three-year-old bounced over the people and the furniture, clamouring for conversation and met with exhausted expletives, "Shut up…get…off don't…" 
The same tug of war you see in any family when the beautiful love affair with a baby becomes a demanding relationship with a little person with an invincible will.
What did that painting symbolise?
It seemed to hold something that couldn't be articulated, like Christian icons of Christ's martyrdom, suffering, but sweetly.
It seemed to filter pain that couldn't be felt.
The women's liberation movement builds on those kind of feelings, the guilts and disappointments of the most passionate relationships, and provides the process in which women can say the unsayable and put personal pain back into politics.
That changes how women feel about themselves and generates a web of activities to pick up the pieces kept hidden when pain is kept private.
However, the dole-queue mothers aren't just victims, suffering women.
Nor are they the "fallen women" of the past.
There is no shame in their situation and they are participating in the disintegration of the moral force of respectability which would once have shamed them within their own class and community.
If respectability was undermined after the Second World War by married women refusing dependence and returning to waged work while also having children, it is being undermined again by the new wave of dole-queue mothers who find a measure of independence in motherhood.
Both disrupt the rules and regulations of respectability, which was about nothing if it was not about controlling the social status of women.
These single parents care about being mothers but they don't care so much about being married and they care even less for being rendered dependent.
Unemployment steals from them the economic conditions which supported the new wave of feminism in the sixties and early seventies, but the welfare state, the provision of child benefit, minimal as it is, and supplementary benefit, mean they can survive in the absence of jobs and wages of their own.
At least they can get out when the going gets rough, as their grandmothers couldn't.
And at least having babies gives the appearance of self-determination.
Nevertheless their rebellion is paradoxical — it may mean a baby and a home and an income, but it also means exile from the culture of their own generation and the political resources available to the employed, respectable working class and its representatives.
Single mothers are disrupting the conservatism of Labourism, they confront the patriarchal principles of women's dependence which is embedded in the old labour movement's codes of behaviour, in housing policies and in the distribution of incomes.
But their dissidence 15 cauterised by their isolation and poverty.
Worse than that, in practice if not intent, many local councils, including Labour authorities, treat them as though they were rough and rootless by banishing them to barren reservations.
They seem to regard them as patients or problems; the last thing they do is help them organise.
Labourism has failed to produce a politics of private life which is not patriarchal; at best it  pities the dole-queue mothers, at worst it scorns them.
The only politics which I saw representing them are those organised by tenants and feminists campaigning primarily around housing, health and children.
So their revolt is fraught with contradictions — resilient and yet pessimistic, they have the stamina to survive and not enough to spare.
What they need is not a man to take care of them, but a new kind of working-class politics that would take care of them and take care of the radicalism of their case.
A Safe Place
On the day when there was a full chamber pot under the breakfast table I decided to leave.
The place was beginning to depress me.
It was not only the dirt, the smells, and the vile food, but the feeling of stagnant, meaningless decay…
It struck me that this place must be fairly normal as lodging houses go, for on the whole the lodgers did not complain.
George Orwell,The Road to Wigan Pier 
If a woman needs to go underground from the unsafety of her own home, she can find sanctuary in the network of "safe houses" set up by the Women's Aid Federation.
When I arrive outside the refuge where I am to stay for several weeks; it is a house with no name.
You'd never know it was a refuge.
Inside, the first room you come to is the office, full of filing cabinets and waste-paper bins, in-and-out trays, directories and box files.
But it isn't just the arbitrary assembly of objects and colours of alienated workplaces: there is a kettle and cups beside the directories, a mirror, photos, postcards, kids' paintings, a hairdryer and deodorant, a barbecue stand, a knitting machine, a cassette playing Randy Crawford and armchairs — the miscellany of bric-a-brac that says this office is lived in.
A woman with big beautiful hands who smokes too much writes down my name and what she needs to know and what I need to tell, and another worker goes through the same routine with a serene and rather silent woman in her early  thirties, with three children and two plastic bags containing toys and toiletries — the mark of a mother on the run, all you can grab in a quick getaway.
Along the corridor from my room, which is spartan but clean, is a former railway clerk, who lives on £30 invalidity pension.
She'd moved in two weeks earlier and always corrected the spelling of her name when it was written wrongly on the cleaning rotas.
She took me up to see her room, which she had to herself until she was joined by another-middle aged woman without children.
On her neat bed is a folded nightie, there's a threadbare rug on the lino beside the bed and a library book on the bedside table.
Hanging on the door is a dressing gown and in the wardrobe a change of clothes given to her when she arrived in the refuge with only the clothes she stood up in and a shopping bag.
Everything is scrounged and second-hand.
 "Lovely isn't it?" she said.
Next to her is a twenty-one-year-old woman sharing her room with two little girls, two teddies and a wardrobe full of clothes acquired in the refuge.
At the end of our corridor is the playroom where the children not yet in school spend their days with playworkers — unemployed women who'd been signing on the dole before getting these "work experience scheme" jobs funded by the Manpower Services Commission.
For most of the mothers this is their first experience of childcare outside their own families.
For all of them it means that the children have somebody's attention all day.
The mothers can sit alone with their preoccupations, or share tea and sympathy and cigarettes with other women, or sort out social security, injunctions, divorces, custody struggles and hassles with housing officials for a new home.
Once a week we have a health visitor who checks to see if the women and their children are well.
 "It's all confidential," she says,"you don't need to tell me anything If you don't want to and nobody else sees these records.
I'm just here if you need me.
If you need a doctor there's this group practice nearby, or that one.
Do you need to see a doctor?
Are you having treatment for anything?"
One other afternoon a week  her desk is occupied by a quiet, middle-aged woman bookkeeper who does the accounts.
She'd got the job after being made redundant and signing on at the job centre.
There are nine workers altogether.
Two administer the refuge, work with the women and their children, order supplies, negotiate with the local authority, housing agencies, lawyers and social workers, plan the annual budget, apply for grants, raise funds, scavenge for second-hand furniture and clothes, bargain with local firms and charities for equipment.
Most importantly they provide a safe passage for women living through the most traumatic encounter they are ever likely to have with men, the law and the state.
For women whose kitchens have been their own, it seems to come naturally enough to share the domestic space in the refuge and at least here they have a room of their own — possibly for the first time in their lives.
I never saw anyone make a cup of tea (nobody drinks coffee, it's too expensive) or smoke a cigarette without offering the same to everyone else.
Meals are different, everybody cooks for themselves and keeps their own cupboard with the universal staples — potatoes, beans, bread, eggs, cornflakes, tea and sugar.
Mine's the same.
We live on chips and beans on toast.
When one of the children asks his mam for some coffee she says, "We can't afford coffee any more, son." 
That's the thing I miss most, a thick, black cup of freshly ground continental roast, a kick in the head.
But one day somebody buys a salad!
"I can't face chips or beans or toast again.
I spent 35p today on a roll and a cream meringue."
There's a large sitting room with worn sofas and chairs and ashtrays and a television high on the wall, it's always on with the sound turned low.
People sometimes look but rarely listen except when "Coronation Street" is on.
And on the mantelpiece there is a book, Marilyn French's The Women's Room which somebody is reading.
The kitchen has two cookers, a big plastic dustbin, two sets of tables and chairs and a tall fridge, which rarely has anything other than milk in it.
Behind the kitchen there's a utility room with two industrial washing machines, bulk cartons of soap powder and an industrial dryer.
The  place has a minimum of things, nearly nothing new, but enough of what the 200 women and about 400 children, who pass through the refuge every year, might need.
 "I used to think these places were terrible, before I came here, but it's marvellous," says one of the mothers whose two boys regard the refuge as "our new house" .
They cling to her hands, legs, skirt constantly, except when the playworkers arrive.
Then they dart off upstairs.
Something about the place is summed up in its smell — the secret life of a space.
It challenges the myth that refuges might be safe but they're squalid.
In any one week there could be a dozen or more children spilling their beans, wetting the beds, hoarding old crusts.
Like any over-populated, under-capitalised place, it could stink of smoke and shit and sick and sleep.
But it doesn't, it smells of work, the wiped-up smell of pine and lavender.
That evening, once the children have gone to bed (little ones at 7.30 p.m. and big ones at 9.30) we're all in the sitting room for the monthly meeting between the women, the workers and the management committee who operate as a support group.
There are as many people as turn up at an average Sunderland boilermakers branch meeting.
We learn that there's a forthcoming regional meeting of a group planning a pamphlet for Women's Aid.
Who wants to go?
One of the workers and one of the women, who's never attended meetings of any kind before living in the refuge, want to go.
After the business we're still sitting around.
The older woman looks tense and upset, and says she's missing her bingo, but daren't go to her old club "because he might see me," but if she doesn't go she'll miss the annual trip and,"if I don't go on that I'll never get out.
She hasn't been outside the refuge properly for two weeks.
 "Well, why not go to the local bingo round here," somebody suggests.
We can check what's on easy enough."
No, she wants to see her old friends.
This was getting serious, the clatter of people talking all at once dies down until there's silence.
 "Are you missing your friends?" somebody asks her.
 "I'm missing everybody," she says.
Her head is in her hands, holding on hard to the tears.
She needs to be held, but that seems dangerous, everybody is hanging on to themselves.
We're mesmerised.
 "I bet the budgie's dead," she says, "he won't remember to feed him." 
One of the workers touches her shoulder, it is only the slightest touch and only for a second.
 "We'll go and see," says the worker.
 "And he hasn't asked about me," says the woman, who still loves her husband and worries about whether he's eating and whether he's well.
She cares for him, "but he doesn't care." 
How did she know?
"I phoned one of my neighbours to find out if she'd heard any noise from our flat.
She said, "Why? is anything wrong?" 
I told her I wasn't there, I'd left, and I thought he'd smash things up and my china cabinet would be the first."
By midnight"an expedition to the bingo is planned, half a dozen from the refuge will go with her in the minibus, and a couple will go to the flat to rescue the precious possessions, the budgie and the china cabinet.
When they get there the china cabinet is still in one piece but the budgie is dead.
This woman arrived at the refuge early one summer evening in 1982 after a row over the dinner.
The day I came here I'd gone down to Age Concern — I used to go there for meetings and bingo — and I told them I wasn't stopping because I'd no money.
Anyway, one of them told me to stay and gave me a raffle ticket.
And I won!
It was groceries, peas, baked beans and things, so I went round to somebody's house and asked if she'd like to buy the Weetabix because I wanted the money for a pie.
I bought a steak and kidney pie, heated it up with the peas and some potatoes and put a couple of spoonfuls of peas on my plate to kid him I'd had some.
Of course, he played war that he'd got rubbish for his dinner, but he'd got everything I could give him.
That's when he started.
He threw a punch at my scar.
[She'd had a breast removed some months earlier.]
I swerved, went into the bedroom, found my shopping bag, packed my nightie and three library books my neighbour loaned me — I knew I'd have to give them back.
I just went through and said, "I'm going out for some cigarettes," and went out, and I've never been back.
I walked to the nearest telephone box and asked the operator if she could put me  through to the refuge — I didn't have a single penny.
The refuge just told me to stay put and they sent a car round for me.
A few of us sit around talking into the night, women's talk about operations and illnesses, birth, blood and death.
The convention of body talk among women creates an impersonal intimacy, by means of our bodies we bare our souls.
 "It's my body," says the oldest when we're complaining about doctors never telling you what's happening.
It takes us aback, perhaps because such a bold outburst connects her unexpectedly to women's liberation, and yet, of course, it affirms feminism's faith in women's wish to reclaim their bodies and in body talk as the great leveller.
It is also shocking because it confronts us with her body, an old woman's body with cancer, only touched when it is being cut or hit.
The young woman who arrived today talks about falling ill while her baby was sick.
"My husband just crumbled when I felt it was me that needed to crumble and somebody to help me.
I had to keep the house going and look after the kids.
I was ill too but I couldn't consider my own feelings.
I never really felt cared for, ever, not in the way of support."
Nobody takes care of mothers.
She wept and we listened.
 "Goodnight," we said, and a houseful of women slept safely alone in their beds.
Within a day or so the newcomers have appointments fixed with social security to get some money and when it looks as if they're staying, negotiations begin with schools to admit their children.
Meanwhile it's sunny and the climbing frame is hauled over to the paddling pool, newly built in the back garden, and the covers are lifted off the sandpit.
The pool is filled with water and bubbles and the kids scoot down the slide attached to the climbing frame into the bubble bath and the arms of a playworker who picks up one of the children and kisses his little red bum.
The mothers are sitting around on the grass while the playworkers look after the children.
One mother of two small children arrives back later in the afternoon looking ashen.
She's just picked up the children from a rendezvous with their father who had an  afternoon's access, and he'd shouted at her and them in the street and threatened to take the children away.
Plans are laid, a couple of the workers will take the children next time and pick them up and a lawyer is contacted to deal with the harassment.
She sits down but doesn't join in the conversations, her face is distracted and her hands move constantly as though she's talking to herself.
She always looks frightened.
 "I was always that frightened," she says,"he screamed at me all the time and the kids.
He didn't play with the kids, he used to hit them, he'd take it out on them more than me.
He said I neglected things, it didn't matter what I did it was never good enough."
Before she married she'd lived alone in a bedsit and worked in a factory for ten years.
After they married they got a council flat on the second floor overlooking a main road.
"So there was nowhere to let the kids out to play.
It was terrible, I just sat in the house all day and when my husband wasn't working he'd just scream at me and the kids would be screaming and he'd be hitting them."
When he was on the dole they lived on £114 a fortnight.
"I never had any pocket money, he spent it all.
I even got a job cleaning for £26 a fortnight and he spent that too, that used to make me feel dead small.
Now I feel like a millionaire and I've got peace of mind."
The rows were always over money and housework: "He'd just go berserk till two or three in the morning, bawling and shouting, and I'd just try to sit and hold his legs.
One time the giro came and it was only £2, so when he went out to phone the social security I just shoved the baby in the pram and walked out to phone social services.
They told me to go home and talk it over.
When I was pregnant many a night I've run out and slept in passages till the morning.
He wanted the place immaculate but he'd never tidy up, he just sat there in his chair from morning till night and got at me all the time about the housework.
I had no friends, I felt as if I had nobody."
One morning the lobby is loaded up with furniture being shunted into a spare room to be stored.
It belongs to a woman in her mid-twenties.
Seven or eight months pregnant with bruised arms and a purple bruise round her eyes.
She  believes she can't stay in the refuge because her husband knows where it is — they live nearby — and she can't stay with her relatives because he's threatened them, too.
So the refuge arranges for her to visit the housing department, and later that day to meet a housing association official who will come to the refuge.
In the afternoon she returns with another woman, who waits for her.
The housing association official asks if she"was a joint tenant of her council flat.
 "Yes." 
"Well, we can't treat you as homeless because you are a joint tenant.
We have policies which we have to stick to very rigidly."
"But I can't stay here because he'll come round.
And he's keeping the flat."
She points to the newcomer and explains, "I met this woman at the council housing department and she said I could stay with her." 
"I can't offer you anything because you've got a tenancy.
Have you got any arrears?"
The woman explains that she probably still has, though she understood they were being paid off and the rent was paid direct through the DHSS.
 "That would have to be sorted out before you could become a tenant of ours," says the official.
"But my husband gets the giro.
He's got the money,"says the woman.
 "You've had that money equally, though," says the official.
 "We won't do anything until that's sorted out and if you give up your share of the joint tenancy." 
 "But I can't contact him," says the woman.
 "The council will handle that," explains one of the workers.
 "But nobody knows where he is, what'll I do in the meantime?" 
"Well, there's very little you can do.
Do you want to live in this area?"asks the official.
 "Yes." 
 "Why, if he's so violent?" 
 "Why should I leave?" the woman replies, "All my family live round here." 
 "You're in a right state with yourself, aren't you?" declares the official.
The refuge worker suggests ringing up the council to check the arrears and clarify the next move.
The council's housing officer says she's got to go back to her flat with an injunction, otherwise she's making herself intentionally homeless, and he says the arrears are £4OO, that's impossible, the DHSS has been paying it direct!
What am I going to do?"
 "Well," says the official, "nobody can help because of all the rules and regulations — we don't make them but we have to  abide by them." 
She doesn't stay here, but the workers stay in overnight — they often work fifty, sixty, seventy hours a week — just in case her husband comes looking for her.
The women are terrified, Carol biting her nails, Irene panicking about a ghost.
It seems surprising, but there isn't much talk in the refuge about marriage or men.
There's also no pressure to come or go, no one scorns the woman who's left home five times and who still goes back, who loves her husband and wants to be wanted.
Everybody knows why she does it.
Equally, everybody knows why everybody stays, they've been through all the arguments a hundred times before and now they don't need to any more, now they know they're not to blame and their husbands aren't the homicidal maniacs some theorists would have them be.
Suddenly it all seems very ordinary, it's civil war on the home front about all the obvious things.
 "The rows started because of money and him going out all the time," said the woman who arrived in the refuge on the same day as me.
 "If he wanted something in the house and I didn't have it he'd say," What did you do with all the money?"
He always made me feel I was doing something wrong.
He'd go to football training, he was into physique, and he'd have a couple of pints after, and at first he went out Fridays and Sundays.
He was typical of the men we knew."
She worked in a clothing factory before her pregnancy.
He was a carpenter earning about £120 a week.
He gave me £50 for my wages.
I didn't like that because it was less than half and all the bills came out of my wages — £100 electricity bills in the winter for the central heating, £5 gas and £7 a week for other bills.
He'd give me money to buy clothes, but I had to keep asking for it.
We had the same bills after he got made redundant.
Some days after I'd been to the supermarket for the week's shopping I'd be smashed, there'd be nothing left.
I always tried to buy some kind of meat, mainly for my husband, chops or rabbit, mince, a couple of chicken joints for a casserole.
If I got him a chop  I'd have a sausage or an egg with the bairns.
I ate the same as them.
We'd have fresh vegetables about twice a week and fresh fruit not very often.
I felt angry with him because there wasn't enough money to buy what he wanted.
When he first got made redundant he got earnings-related dole, about £7 for himself, but I never had money of my own.
He very rarely helped round the house, because he felt we had different jobs.
I'd ask him to clean the bath when he got out or occasionally hoover, but he wouldn't so we rowed about that, especially after he got made redundant.
I'd be working away while he was just sitting.
He'd say, "Leave it, it doesn't matter," but if I'd left it the place would be a pigsty.
I felt I'd tried everything, I'd tried to be a good wife, mother, mistress what else could I do?
She tried to work herself, and got a couple of nights barmaiding, but he didn't like that, and he didn't like one of the children going to nursery.
 "He thought the kids should be at home with me." 
And when he started going out all the time, she started going out occasionally.
I went out with the lasses, we were all married women, and I'd get a babysitter for £1.
He never did.
I got several black eyes during the rows and eventually I left — I left several times and always went back.
I was just fed up with the whole situation.
I'll work as soon as I can, I'd like to do something nice, but I expect it'll be barmaiding.
One of the youngest women in the refuge, twenty-one years old with two children, worked before she was a mother as a shop assistant:
I'd wanted to be a nurse or a policewoman, but I had to leave school right away and help support my family.
We never fought when we were engaged, and I thought we'd just get married and have our own little home, I thought the bills would get paid and we'd be closer than we were before.
He adored the baby and would help when she woke at night.
He gave me £30 a week and I'd pay for the bills, £12 rent, £5.50 for two bags of coal and the rest went on food.
He liked proper meals, he lived on liver or chops, his bait would come out of the family allowance and I'd not eat during the day, then eat the same as him at night."
Like most of the other women in the refuge, she never went on holiday after she was married, never went to the pictures and rarely went out.
I went out half a dozen times in the three years we were married.
He went out three or four nights a week at first and then every night.
After a bit he got a job in a brick works and picked up £80 a week on day shift and £100 on night shift.
My wages went up to £40.
I asked him for more but he said that with the family allowance we had the same.
I got offered a part-time job in a bakery at the weekends, and he said he'd look after the kids, but he never did, so I couldn't do it.
After we had the second child we had the rows, he'd not let me go to her when she cried.
He'd make me sleep with the kids, then he'd make me come back to bed with him, in and out all night.
She said he threw the baby around, tried to strangle them all and ripped up the furniture.
Eventually a social worker told her she should leave.
"Mind you I wasn't pleased at all, because I wanted my own home.
I knew I could stand it, but not the kids."
The oldest woman in the refuge had worked as a railway clerk, in a sausage factory, a pop factory and in a factory making bingo boards until she stopped working a few years earlier and was put on invalidity benefit.
Her husband is disabled too, and worked until a year or so earlier.
He got £3 pocket money when he was working, but when he finished and we were both on invalidity benefit, that was the worst part.
Because he had too much time, he'd go to the club afternoon and night.
He has to have his £5 on Friday, and he wouldn't take any less than £2 a session, we both smoke, so that would be a total of about £6 a day at least, and then I'd spend £1 on our tea alone.
Often I could only afford a small steak and kidney pie and I'd give it to him, or a chop.
I'd have potatoes and cabbage and gravy.
Out of their invalidity benefits, which came to £60, rent  took £5.10, and he expected to spend £5 daily on drink and cigarettes — at least.
That left £10, or less, per week for food.
He always liked to say what was going to be done, he was very domineering.
I'd generally talk him round, but never answer back.
He'd threaten that I'd not get any money the next week, but I always managed to.
I got a social worker and she suggested I get a bus pass, so I could get to town.
I tried six times but got turned down because I wasn't sixty.
I couldn't afford to go anywhere, I cant walk far, so I had to buy stuff locally where it was dearer because the bus fare was 64p.
The last new clothes she had was when she married twenty years before.
Apart from that it was jumble sales or what I got given.
Generally I'd buy him a second-hand suit and take it up.
I used to have a sewing machine, but I had to sell it when we got into difficulty with an electric bill.
The last time I saved any money was my redundancy pay, but that soon went.
We never went to the pictures and I never had any pictures on the wall.
For a treat for myself I'd occasionally buy a cream cake.
The social worker said I should get out of the house, so I got enticed down to Age Concern and passed the afternoon there.
We played bingo and had a cup of tea and a laugh.
The violence had begun about two years before:
He was always crafty, he'd hit me where it was covered, on the body and the legs, never on my face.
One day I darted out of his way and he broke his hand on the settee.
I rushed him to hospital and the doctor asked how it was done and I said he'd fallen over on the step.
He hit me a lot, but I suffered it till I couldn't stand it any more.
Everybody knew and said I should leave, but it's not so easy to leave your home and all the furniture I'd bought when I was on the railway.
I think it wouldn't have been so bad if he hadn't swore at me so much, that was worse than hitting me.
She is a Christian woman and she whispers some of the  words he called her.
As the weeks go by she begins to receive visitors at the refuge and when she begins to feel the marriage is over, with the workers' help she starts negotiating with the council and housing associations for a new flat, although she also feels the refuge is home, a safe space that is becoming more and more difficult to leave.
After several months she moves into her flat.
Within six months she has died of cancer.
The only mourners at her funeral are the women from the refuge.
During my first few days in the refuge, I feel myself descend into depression.
The quest for social pain becomes a preoccupation with my own pain — after all, feminists usually start from their point of identification with other women, and I have my own troubles too, like I'm also"intentionally homeless', a person who's got out in order to get up.
So I'm getting sadder and sadder among these women who are getting stronger and stronger.
Then there's a jolt — I'm not the same as these women, I have no children, no dependants and I have skills I can sell without impediment.
Only women who are not in the same circumstances as most women can up and off for six months.
I'm able to be in the refuge because I choose to be — nothing is keeping me here.
I have the one thing most women don't have — freedom of movement.
Staying at the refuge becomes very comfortable, it's very companionable and the women are very nice.
There are forms of care which are absent, certain kinds of intimacy, and friendship, no touching, for instance, but it's compensated by other kinds of care which are possible and not risky.
Like tonight: Sylvia didn't come home and everybody was world about her.
The only people here are women and everybody feels safe and understood.
The refuge has been more revealing about people and poverty than I'd expected, because what it's revealed is the hard edge of the sex differential.
The women who come to refuges do so because marriage is unbearable and they have no resources to give them anywhere else to run to.
So the question of economics is central too.
Also, they are mainly  here because they have small children and no earnings of their own.
All the women in the refuge are poorer than men, all are allocated less money, distribution of resources, food, drink, clothing, money and time within their own families.
They aren't just poor women, they are battered In breaking away they aren't just leaving home, they are changing from the victims they once thought they were into survivors, transformed by their own flight into a little bit of freedom and safety among other women.
Unlike the hostels for the homeless, places of last resort where inmates feel treated as if they have no rights, the refuge is a place of first resort, where women learn they have rights and how to exercise them.
feminism has generated this network of refuges.
(If they'd existed in George Orwell's day, when they were needed at least as much as now, we'd have been spared all his sentimental fallacies about the perfect symmetry of family life.)
But feminism never prescribes its own politics for the inhabitants.
Firstly, because it goes against its grain: women always have to find their own way to where they're going.
Secondly, it doesn't need to — the feminist consciousness which builds the refuges is only the commonsense of its clients.
This gives the lie to the notion that women's liberation is only a middle-class indulgence — the refuges are a complex resource maintained by a poor movement for poor women.
They are where sex and class meet — the women are there because domestic violence, like rape, is something men do to women, not because they're mad or homicidal maniacs, but as an expression of ordinary domestic conflict between unequals.
The violence is only the exercise of an ultimate weapon available to men.
And the women are poor because they are working-class and women.
The refuge is more than that, though — it is a new kind of politics with the power to change lives.
It isn't about only opposing, it isn't about passing resolutions, formulating programmes, making demands of something or someone else, or administering consensus.
It does what is necessary for itself.
But the Women's Aid movement is more — it is a radical  intervention in the law and order debate, it goes beyond a puritanical protection of women which reproduces their vulnerability, and it transcends the limits of the Left-Right contest between police authoritarianism and police accountability.
It was no accident that when I was writing this, the Conservatives had just been returned to power in the 1983 election, and one of their first moves was to try to disguise popular discontent with the police by the restoration of the rope.
For one awful month, it looked as though England was about to sink irretrievably into barbarism.
But we were pulled back from the brink; the attempt failed.
However, it is worth reflecting on another dimension of the law and order forces.
We may too readily have mocked the Tory ladies in their funny hats advocating primitive retribution, for what the socialist movement has not registered is that these ladies articulate a collective fear which women share.
Their catalogue of culprits — muggers, rapists, robbers, child molesters — are categories of men.
* The Tory ladies add to these another — trade-union bullyboys.
What is absent, not surprisingly in the context of their rhetoric about the family, is that home is where many women endure violence against their person.
The Tory concern is not with that kind of domestic warfare, but with war on the streets.
Their response is authoritarian.
The Left's response, quite correctly in some respects, is to counter the authoritarianism of the state with demands for public control of the strong arm of the state, a demand which has found force in the escalating evidence of state violence in Ireland and in England police abuse of the people in the name of protection of the people.
However, the Left has ducked the problem of widespread fear of violence within the working class, arguing that violence is the result of deprivation — once the people are no longer deprived they'll no longer be depraved.
The difficulty with this is that it is an appeal to the future, and it concedes the debate about the present to the Right.
It took women's liberation to formulate  a different kind of positive intervention, one that seeks to protect the casualties and raise consciousness about the causes of violence.
It has thus politicised the problem of violence beyond the parameters set by the law and order debate.
It does what the Tory ladies can't do, which is to name women's fear of men.
It shows that domestic violence, sexual harassment, rape, incest and sexual assault are commonplace manifestations of a dynamic based on men's power and women's subordination.
In setting up women's refuges and rape crisis centres it does not seek revenge, it seeks to take care of the survivors and to change the policies of state agencies.
In a different context, feminists have worked within trade unions to mobilise grievance procedures to protect women who complain of sexual harassment, either by their bosses or by fellow workers.
In specifying what sexual harassment means — anything from pinups and sexist jokes to assault and rape at work — its policies against sexual harassment raise the consciousness of men.
What is truly radical about this innovation is that it intervenes in the quality of life at work, the culture shared between men and women workers, on the side of women.
By adopting policies against sexual harassment they are opposing hitherto-accepted codes of normal masculinity and their effects in exercising power and control over women.
In other words, they take the side of women against forms of male power.
In so doing, they enable women to organise against their own victimisation and create the conditions in which men themselves may take responsibility for the reform of masculinity.
Feminism's concern with sexual politics extends into the whole range of representations of sexuality, masculinity and femininity, from advertising to pornography — it intervenes in the culture and in so doing seeks to change the ways in which men and women inhabit their masculinity and femininity.
Every day during my stay in the refuge the women would go out to see social security officials, the housing department, lawyers.
Meanwhile I'd go round the town interviewing trade unionists, redundant workers, councillors, tenants and  community associations: the reform of men was not yet part of their agenda.
And yet in their own city, hundreds of women and children every year crawl out of the front line into this trench.
If it were Northern Ireland we'd call it war.
Baths and Bosses:the Miners
The machines that keep us alive, and the machines that make the machines are all directly or indirectly dependent upon coal.
In the metabolism of the Western world the coal-miner is a sort of grimy caryatid upon whose shoulders nearly everything that is not grimy is supported.
George Orwell,The Road to Wigan Pier 
The socialist movement in Britain has been swept off its feet by the magic of masculinity, muscle and machinery.
And in its star system, the accolades go to the miners — they've been through hell, fire, earth and water to become hardened into heroes.
It is masculinity at its most macho that seems to fascinate men.
Miners are men's love object.
They bring together all the necessary elements of romance.
Life itself is endangered, their enemy is the elements, their tragedy derives from forces greater than they, forces of nature and vengeful acts of God.
That makes them victim and hero at the same time, which makes them irresistible — they command both protection and admiration.
They are represented as beautiful, statuesque, shaded men.
The miner's body is loved in the literature of men, because of its work and because it works.
It is the nature of the work that produces a tendency among men to see it as essential and elemental, all those images of men down in the abdomen of the earth, raiding its womb for the fuel that makes the world go round.
The intestinal metaphors foster the cult of this work as dark and  dangerous, an exotic oppression, visceral and yet alienated.
It constructs the worker, the miner, as earth-man and earth-man is true man.
And it completes an equation between some idea of elemental work and essential masculinity.
This romance is duly mirrored in working-class politics — miners are the Clark Gables, the Reds of class struggle.
The cult of masculinity in work and play and politics thrives only in exclusive freemasonries of men with their secret codes which render women immigrants in their own communities.
There's nothing like secrets to thwart democracy.
But the exclusion is all-important because women's presence would dissolve the symmetry between men's work and masculinity.
So it is that the fetish of masculinity is fashioned in men-only milieus — we look to footballers, boxers, soldiers and miners to find our real men.
But back to the body.
Men who write about miners lavish poetic pleasure on their bodies, they seek to explain miners in the language of their statuesque and satanic physique.
"It is only when you see miners down the mine and naked that you realise what splendid men they are.
Most of them are small (big men are at a disadvantage in that job) but nearly all of them have the most noble bodies; wide shoulders tapering to slender supple waists, and small pronounced buttocks, with not an ounce of waste flesh anywhere,"says Orwell in Wigan Pier.
It is a familiar fascination; D.H.
Lawrence had it, and more recently Vic Allen in his history of the Left's rise in the National Union of Mineworkers, The Militancy of the British Miners (Moor Press, 1981) writes about his attachment to these men.
They evoked for him images of hard, unrefined men, distinct and separate from other workers, hewing in the mysterious dungeons; they are dirty, strange and attractive because they are masculine and sensuous.
In Orwell's celebration of the glamour of miners, Orwell can't resist a ruling class analogy: they've got a "figure fit for a guardsman," he said.
No doubt it was the finest accolade from an old Etonian, and no doubt it meant something then when miners were regarded as dark, ignoble savages both by the respectable Brighton ladies who are a typical target for  Orwell's abuse and among the respectable, washed working class.
But looking back on his tribute to the miners, it is a flawed masterpiece.
It isn't that his pleasure in masculinity is suspect so much as that all that sensuous attention tells us something else about the cult of masculinity among men.
Clearly it involves a mass narcissism which is supported by the social structures within which they work and play.
Men can see themselves as the ideal human type because they live in structures in which they are dominant.
Women don't have that collective narcissism because they are a subordinate sex.
But the form of that narcissism tells us more about men's love of men: it is masculinity in general that they love, and there is"a contradictory corollary in the iconography of miners — it both suggests and suppresses sexuality.
Orwell epitomises it, he eroticises his "black and naked" and "splendid" men, but his elegy is punctuated by a brisk and brutal denial of desire in what his biographer, Bernard Crick, calls his "aggressive heterosexuality" .
The Road to Wigan Pier's wanton polemics against effete intellectuals and strident feminists are suffused by homophobia.
Did he know how much he went on and on about"Nancy poets' and namby pambies?
Didn't any of his best friends tell him?
Orwell makes miners the core of his chronicle, they are the essential man and the essential worker, but the equation between work and masculinity depends on an exclusion — women.
The suppression of sexuality which is material both to his affinity for and his analysis of coal mining is also a suppression of history.
The equation is represented as natural, and that gives it the force of commonsense.
It is typical of Orwell — recruiting the readers' commonsense to conquer history.
Mining as men's work, as a natural and obvious essence of work, has a history, however.
The  archaeology of mining reveals a historic struggle over the sex of miners.
Just as men's muscularity was and is celebrated in the histories, so was another man fascinated by the muscularity of women who worked at the pitheads.
A Victorian gentleman called A.J. Munby toured the Wigan coalfield talking to the pit brow "lasses" who worked at the pit top sorting coal from  muck during an intense instance in the nineteenth-century struggle to regulate the sex of waged workers and of men and women.
In Wigan the women wore trousers, they had the strength of horses, and Munby loved that.
But their very strength, and their androgynous uniform, was invoked in the campaign to abolish their right to the work, a campaign which divided both male miners and coal owners during the 1890s.
According to Angela John's history of the struggle, By The Sweat of Their Brow (Croom Helm, 1980) opposition to the women's work focused on control over their sexuality and motherhood and on the employers' attitudes — some supported the women because they were cheap labour.
Some feminists, too, supported the women's right to work.
But the men reacted to the women"on the basis of sex solidarity rather than seeing them as part of the working class'.
Although the colliery communities -were never really associated with the cult of respectability, which was so important in dividing the "rough" from the "respectable" working class in Victorian England, nevertheless the pit brow women were regarded as a moral threat.
The purge failed in Wigan and women were still working there and in a couple of other regions until after nationalisation.
Deputations of pit brow lasses visited Parliament in the 1880s and in 1911 during campaigns by the miners and some coal owners to exclude them from the collieries.
The women found support from some local miners and coal owners as well as feminists.
Many pit brow lasses also did stints in Wigan mills, but they're nostalgic for the hard, rough and often bitterly cold pit brow.
"The mills were hot and dusty, and we were used to the cold.
I know it sounds crackers but we preferred it,"said one of the pit brow lasses who started working at the pit when she was fourteen and finished when the women's work was abolished after nationalisation.
The women enjoyed their sense of strength — some wielded seven-pound hammers — and independence.
Nationalisation brought mechanisation of their work which involved separating dirt — slate — from the coal before sale.
But the jobs in the new mechanised washeries went not to the women they displaced but to men.
Where  renewed attempts in Parliament to exclude the women in the early 1950s failed, the union succeeded.
Feminism faded, women were domesticated and their right to work with coal was finally extinguished.
One of Wigan's local councillors, whose mother was active in the Labour Party women's section, remembers that she also worked on the pit top.
"She wanted to do it, she was one of the type who believed in doing it because she wanted to.
She was a women's libber really, because she said they'd tried to stop the pit brow lasses, but it never came off."
So, the mines weren't always men's work.
And the existence of such women is a memorial to a hidden history of intra-class conflict.
These women weren't entirely defeated, and they weren't yet buried, their resistance could have been called to bear witness, but Orwell himself participated in the struggle for their exclusion by hiding their history.
No doubt he could be forgiven for an inadvertent omission, but women more than most know that life, like history, is made up of inadvertencies.
In Orwell's time, Wigan was as much a cotton town as it was a coal town, and if his excavation of the elements of exploitation was to have been adequate, it could not have omitted the experience of women in the cotton industry.
He ought to have known better, but he was blinded by his own sex-centredness.
And given his own class position, as an  émigré from the upper middle-class, a class serviced by the domestic labour of the working class, it is telling that he understands the contribution of coal to his class comfort, but doesn't discuss the contribution of that other "service" , domestic service.
The census of 1931 which describes the distribution of workers at the beginning of Orwell's decade, recorded twice as many workers in domestic service as there were miners (about two million, compared with one million miners).
And, as he warned us about the hewers of coal, we are as capable of forgetting that, as he did, "as we forget the" blood in our veins'.
We would do well to transpose Orwell's transposition of Chesterton: the metabolism of the Western world is founded on the work of women more completely  than we realise until we stop to think about it.
Orwell doesn't understand half the world because he doesn't see it.
In the Bible of class solidarity, miners and men are the archetypes.
Miners par excellence, depending which side you are on, are seen as the satyrs or the saviours of the working class, they are either the devils or the messiahs who will lead us out of the land of Canaan.
Men have to beware of their fascination for these men whose solidarity in work and play is founded on the exclusion of women.
Their solidarity was based on sex, their own sex, as much as it was ever based on class.
Orwell broke with his class to express his solidarity with the miners in The Road to Wigan Pier, and he expressed his solidarity in terms of his own class position.
"In a way it is even humiliating to watch coal miners working.
It raises in you a momentary doubt about your own status as an "intellectual" , and a superior person generally."
Like Orwell, women's relationship to miners starts from the basis of exclusion and mystery, but women live with the drama and danger of the pits, they live their solidarity with the pitmen.
Their story can't be written without the story of the men, but then neither could the story of the miners be truly told without including the women.
The shroud thrown over the subordination of women in the mining communities has much to tell us about the myth of the"archetypical proletarians'.
Let us look at their respective relationship to work and home.
Orwell used the miners as the classic case of the working class; through them he revealed its suffering and its stamina.
But the relationships within which women laboured in the coal communities would have told him even more about class struggle than did his breathtaking chronicle of labour down there in the dark.
Or rather, the men and women's relationship to each other— unlike the work of hewing coal which is not typical of work in capitalist economies — that relationship, even in its extremities, was typical of something that shaped class struggle in Britain.
It helps to explain the conservatism of our class struggle, and its failure to mature into socialist struggle.
The miners' historian, Robin Page Arnot, in his book The Miners: Years of Struggle (1950) briefly but pertinently shared feminism's concern with housework as labour that reproduces life and the capacity to labour.
Unlike Orwell and his fetish, coal, he suggests that women's work was vital to life.
 "Nearly every convenience which the nature of the miners' occupation demanded had to be furnished and maintained by the drudgery of the womenfolk." 
That drudgery could have been transformed overnight by the provision of pithead baths for the men, and for their clothes, which were often so laden with dust that, as one old miner recalled, "I used to bray my gear against the wall" .
When the clothes were wet and were put to dry in front of the household's fire, they polluted the whole atmosphere with sulphurous fumes.
The history of miners' trade unionism throughout the twentieth century carried an oddly incidental commitment to transforming those conditions of women's work.
The industry was unique in that the law prescribed for it health and recreational provisions, what we now call the social wage, for most of this century.
All of human life was there, in the politics of coal, but half of human life had no voice and no vote.
That meant that the unique opportunity to unite the whole community in demands of the coal-owners that would benefit the whole community were squandered.
Arnot says it:
For the mining community as a whole there was one half unorganised, unsafeguarded, unrepresented in Parliament — the wives and mothers of working miners…
No government reports measured from year to year the changes in their conditions of life: nor do they figure in statistical columns beyond their place in the tables of births, deaths, and marriages.
Their song, or their dirge, remained unsung, or at any rate unheard.
The story of the pithead baths bears him out.
Under the 1911 Coal Mines Act, pithead baths had to be provided if two-thirds of the miners voted for them.
Miners' leaders committed to the baths heeded the advice of a mining engineer at the Royal Commission which resulted in the 1911  act, whose advice was: if you win the women to the cause of pithead baths you will win the baths.
After a tough debate within the Miners' Federation in 1911 — the miners were not united on the baths' efficacy — some of the miners' leaders collaborated with women activists in the labour movement and during the First World War brought out a pamphlet, published by the Women's Labour League, promoting pithead baths, including testimony from Robert Smillie and the well-known feminist Kathryn Bruce-Glazier.
Above all, the cause was identified with the interests of women.
Robert Smillie, who became the leader of the Miners' Federation, told the 1911 conference: "I think it is a shame and a disgrace that the lives of our miners' wives, from four in the morning until 11 o'clock at night should be one long day of slavery." 
He believed "the dirt of the pit should be left at the pit" .
Successive commissions and reports amplified the case for provision of social services — especially baths and canteens — and recreational facilities, through a levy on coal, during the inter-war period.
It culminated in the clean-up of the industry inaugurated by nationalisation after the Second World War.
By then, though, many communities had their clubs and institutes, among the few places of pleasure on their barren landscape, or miners'"casinos', as one aggrieved Durham clergyman called them.
Only a third of collieries had pithead baths before nationalisation.
The promise of the social wage, enshrined in the law, had given the miners remarkable room for political  manoeuvre to humanise their spartan communities.
More important, it sanctioned struggle by men to mitigate the interminable labour of their women.
But all the old miners I met, contemporaries of Orwell, remembered the arrival of the baths, thought they were wonderful, yet couldn't remember how they came or who fought for them.
Their construction became a treat for the whole community.
 "It caused a little social outing in my family," said a pitman's daughter who grew up in the South Yorkshire pit village where her father worked.
"It was in the mid-50s and I was about nine or ten years old.
One Sunday my dad took us  all up to see the new pit-head baths.
We thought it was so smashing — it sticks in my mind because it was such a treat.
An old miner in Barnsley summed up the euphoria:
For all the pay rises in the world, the finest thing that ever came out of the pit was a bath.
Nobody knows what a fella felt like then.
I know what I felt like, I can't describe it.
I felt like a fairy.
The first time they went into the baths, you couldn't get them out.
At first people kept their drawers on, then they'd lower them.
And they started keeping their clothes at the pit.
It was a godsend for the women.
Given the pleasure and benefit to both men and women, why was it never a primary campaigning focus?
A much-respected retired Communist deputy in south Yorkshire summarised the pillars of working men's politics: "Probably most were anti-boss though not necessarily anti-system." 
Consequently, nationalisation expressed their political wish, but just as that didn't extend to an alternative philosophy at the economic or political level, neither did it extend to a radical philosophy of personal life.
Men believed in mastery over women, keeping them in protective custody.
 "We were never well off," said a retired miner from the Durham coalfield, "but I was always in employment and I wouldn't have liked my wife to work." 
But wives did work, often longer hours than their menfolk.
And so the explanation lies in the men's relation both to the culture of domesticity, power in the domestic sphere, and the sexual division of labour.
 "Men worked very hard," said the deputy,"and there were no baths — it was accepted that women would, do it all, they didn't think that the women were working all hours.
I was unconsciously striving for something different; I got that from my mother who couldn't carry it forward for herself."
His first revolt against the culture of women's subordination was"against my mother having to get up in the morning, like they all did, to cut the bread for the lads.
I was only a lad.
So she stopped.
My dad, he thought she ought to do it, and he was amazed at me taking a stand."
Another retired miner in Sunderland, whose wife had never earned her own living and  who never wanted her to, was similarly affronted by the extremities of the power relationship:
The men were domineering.
I know it with my own missus.
I remember talking about domination with people older than me, and I didn't think it was right.
Some men thought more about their whippets or their pigeons — they thought nowt of slinging the wife out on the street.
Men were brutal then.
People used to say, if you didn't get your own way in your own house, where would you get it?
The miners' capricious commitment, or lack of it, to the baths and canteens — the communal demands — can be treated as a classic case of patriarchal priorities in class struggle.
Their political passivity about these communal services can't be understood without taking into account the benefit of keeping it all in the family — for men it secured their surveillance over the time and labour of women.
That was their stake and it detonated the kind of politics which are the stuff of socialism in our society.
The patriarchal principle surrendered class solidarity to myopia and minimalism.
The loyalty of the women of the mining communities to their menfolk is, of course, legend.
It is invoked as an instance of those communities' internal solidarity.
But that loyalty was mediated by a common critique of their own, shared in kitchens and over doorsteps, of the authoritarianism endured by the women.
Yet the memoirs of these survivors, their dirge, is rarely inscribed in the chroniclers' sentimental journeys.
In the small coal communities, the pit was as often as not the sole source of wage-earning incomes.
The women's exclusion from the pit separated them from a share in those incomes.
The failure to socialise the work of washing and feeding confined women's labour for the miners, and indirectly for the coal owners too, to a private economy in which women were subject to vigorous authoritarianism and economic powerlessness.
For all the discomfort of going home covered in evil-smelling dust, of whole living spaces colonised by the drill of the tin bath and the miner's ablutions, and the pollution produced by the  sulphurous rags, the miner had  some advantages: the home revolved around him and his needs.
His woman's labour was for him.
It was a personal control over the labour and time of women.
For the employers, that stake in personal power also provided, at no cost, the work that made miners' work possible.
After nationalisation in 1948, the pits were transformed by the universal provision of baths and canteens — social places to perform the private work of women.
For many women in coal communities it provided the only wage labour available to them, and for the first time it provided wages for the work they'd always done.
The pit canteen is the only women's workplace, for example, in a pit village of fewer than 100 households I visited.
The miners' welfare club put on concerts — their only social entertainment — and provides space for a mothers' and toddlers' group where there is no nursery.
A woman I talked to, a single parent, gets up at 4.30 a.m. every morning.
By 5.15 she's in the canteen where she works until 7.15 when she clocks off to go home and get her children to school.
She's back in the canteen from 9 a.m. until 3 p.m., when she goes home to the children and her working day starts its next shift.
For that she takes home £55.60 a week.
Another canteen worker in the same village told me she does a shift from 11 a.m. until 4 p.m., returns home to work for her family, then she's back at the pit from 7.30 p.m. until 10.45 p.m.
The shifts vary to cover all the hours of the men's comings and goings.
A woman who worked 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. said,"My husband works the same hours.
You live with them and you feed them here — a lot have their main meal here in the canteen.
Otherwise I'd have to go home at 5.30 p.m. and I'd have to start all over again."
I spent an afternoon in Sunderland with an old miner in his eighties, who wasn't a club man or active in the union, with this lovely voice, talking about first going down as a trapper — he sat all day when he was thirteen by the trap doors which the paddy wagons carrying coal had to pass through, all day in the pitch dark.
He wasn't a political man, spent his leisure going out shooting rabbits for "snap" (food), and it was obvious that his most intimate relationships were  with his dogs and the land I'd forgotten coal-mines are often almost "rural" .
He got married during the general strike.
Like all old miners, he remembered the coming of the pit baths, they were the best thing that ever happened, he said.
And nationalisation: that was great because it got rid of the old bosses.
Again, such powerful memories among the very old of pre-war Britain, and their sense of very injured oppression.
He hated the bosses — no wonder.
Another old miner, a beautiful, gracious man with a graceful mind, but breathless with pneumoconiosis, showed me a list of disastrous explosions in the Yorkshire collieries in the thirties and early forties — there were major explosions nearly every year.
Sometimes, he said, they worked with only two feet of air along the roadways, not enough to breathe.
Everything changes but nothing changes…
"
I work on the face now, and there are always dodgy situations when a lump of rock falls and just misses you.
It doesn't frighten you so much as remind you where you are,"explained a young Barnsley miner.
Miners today work with advanced coal-cutting machinery and hydraulic props, they're safer and they're better paid.
But coal is coal.
And getting to it can mean one man hauling himself through a two-foot tunnel for half an hour in six inches of water.
Skill makes men dextrous, but that doesn't diminish the spectacle of a man leaping like a fox around corridors of coal too low to stand up, cramped with hydraulic props and coal-cutters.
If it is like hell, it is sometimes a cosy sort of hell, snug with the smell of clay, but the work is treacherous, and the machinery has brought with it some new risks.
But miners don't suffer alone.
They have compensations few people have — the community itself, and its women at their service.
Miners may strike in support of nurses, but that doesn't make them fighters for the equality of women or for women as women.
I spent some time with another elderly miner in Sunderland.
In one piquant moment, he was standing in the middle of the living room talking, while his wife scurried about making a bit of food.
They're a very companionable couple, and enjoy spending time together, they go to political meetings, have the  family round, work in their magnificent garden.
Anyway, there he was, the subject of the company, everybody around his villages loves and respects him, and his wife also talked about how loved he was.
There was no formal power play there, it was just that the very fabric of his psyche was about being central, the central person, the interesting person and everybody collaborated in that.
His wife talked to him, about him, used his name, named him, registered him, but he never referred to her, never named her.
He was lovely but watching him in that living room somehow said it all.
I met a very nice old man, an NUM moderate a couple of times.
We talked about the general strike, family, marriage, work, the union, the Labour Party.
He's lived life in a tiny community, a respected member of his class.
I asked about his wife.
He said she didn't do anything and wasn't very bright.
I asked to meet her.
She came into the working-men's club one lunchtime and got her bottle of stout.
There she was, wearing a mac, a crimplene frock over her body which just seemed to hang like a cheese from her shoulders, a little woolly hat and NHS specs, and the inevitable shopping bag.
 "Hello pet," and we shake hands.
I asked about her work before she married.
She'd rarely been at school, went into domestic service, couldn't read, but can write her name, then got married.
She's in her seventies now.
No, she never had a paid job after that because he wouldn't like it.
No, she hadn't any friends, because he wouldn't like it.
No, she never was in the Co-op Women's Guilds, because he wouldn't like it.
 "I just stopped at home." 
She was wonderfully direct, straightforward and honest.
Nothing to hide.
It was different now, she said, some women didn't get married, or had three or four men.
What did she think of that?
It was "all right," she said.
Contraception?
 "Oh God, we never had any of that, but some women used to soak their feet in mustard, or have operations." 
I thought she was a lovely person.
Her family were good, she said, "never caused us any bother" , and her husband was good, "d'you know, he's never been to court in all his life." 
He was very nice.
She was very nice, too.
He fought for things we'd disagree with, like wives staying at home.
It  wasn't his fault, but that belief formed the backbone of much of his politics, actually.
She never had any politics because she wasn't allowed to.
It's the same with most of the old ladies I talk to, and frankly it breaks your heart.
Still many miners don't welcome women in their political midst.
A woman in the Northeast involved in a campaign to improve colliery houses arrived at a lodge meeting with material on the houses for the members.
 "They told me" we've never let a woman on before and we're not going to now "and they didn't." 
Part of the culture of miners' militancy draws on the religious motifs that moulded working-class ideology — the more you suffer the more you deserve.
What used to be pie in the sky when you die has, quite rightly, become pie now, please.
But it is still pie for Orwellian man, who suffers to save us all:
It is only because miners sweat their guts out that superior persons can remain superior.
You and I and the editor of the Times Lit.
Supp., and the nancy poets and the Archbishop of Canterbury and Comrade X, author of Marxism for Infants — all of us really owe the comparative decency of our lives to poor drudges underground, blackened to their eyes, with their throats full of coal dust, driving their shovels forward with arms and belly muscles of steel.
It was the meeting of martyrdom and militancy that brought their ascension to the top of the manual wages league in the 1970s, and secured them their place as the romantic heroes of the class war.
But that same militant masculinity has to be seen for the contradictory and often conservative force that it is.
Mining communities are committed communities, but they are not equal communities.
With the introduction of baths and canteens, there is now work for the women that carries a wage with it.
But no woman manual workers in the industry yet earn as much as any of the men.
The lowest paid man working on the surface in 1982 earned £94.10 minimum.
The highest paid woman manual workers, supervising a canteen with 11 or more staff under her, earned a maximum of £88.68.
Only when it was discovered that some men, formerly working on the surface, were working in  canteens on the lowest male rate — higher than the female rate — did the union begin to campaign for equal pay for the women.
But women's right to earn as much as men on the grounds of their economic equality with the men of their community had not prompted an earlier campaign.
The very argument that had supported the miners' own rise in the wages league during the 1970s — that the work was difficult and dangerous — counted against an egalitarian measurement of women's skills.
The image of the miners as gladiators for women during the Grunwick strike by Asian women in London in the late seventies and the hospital workers' strikes during the early eighties veiled their reservations about the rights of women in general, which have been entrenched in the culture of their community.
The sexual apartheid has been reinforced in the assumptions about men's social rights and women's domesticity.
Male activists are out every night unless they stay in for the wife's one night out.
They may spend Saturday night together, and as often as not you see the men holding up the bar with their pints and the women sitting at the tables with their shorts.
It is part of their folklore that the men go out to the pub or club at Sunday dinner time and there isn't a woman to be seen.
They share that with thousands of working-men's clubs throughout the country.
The men are drinking and the women are cooking their dinner.
A Sunderland miner described his week to me: "I'm at the pit every weekday.
I attend at least one meeting of an evening, the union and the Labour Party.
Most nights I go to the miners' welfare or a pub, or a club.
Most of the people I knock about with are in the union.
The wife stops in, and one night a week she goes out with her women mates.
That's fairly routine up here.
For anybody in my circle that's fairly routine."
And a South Yorkshire miner said: "My day starts at 5 or 6 a.m.
Start work at 7.30.
Then I'm home between 2.30 or 3 p.m. or if there is a meeting it is 4.30 p.m.
I eat something, have a nap or watch telly for an hour, then I'm out.
It's very rare that I stop in, so I see very little of the wife and kids."
Shortly after the miners elected their new Left leadership in 1982, the executive of the union launched a national tour through the coalfields in support of their annual claim.
Four thousand miners packed Sheffield's city hall one night that winter.
It was an extraordinary moment in their history — a united leadership led by the Left, returning to the coalfields to campaign for their agreed claim.
Out of that 4,000 I saw maybe a dozen or so women.
It wasn't a policy-making meeting, there was no vote and no debate, so any women could have gone.
But the wives weren't there, though, of course, they were implicated in the result of the ballot in the claim, as they always have been.
Robin Page Arnot was right, the women were disenfranchised before nationalisation, and they still are today.
The lads had turned out to hear their lads.
For Yorkshiremen the meeting was like the town turning out to greet the local boy who scored in the Cup Final.
This was "our Arthur" at his first big political contest on home ground since his election to presidency of the union.
It was an exemplary Scargill performance in the long and honourable tradition of working-class orators who combine politics with pleasure — hard facts, immaculate timing and lots of jokes at the expense of the class enemy.
There were more standing ovations than I've ever heard.
A Yorkshire miner said retrospectively that he'd wanted Scargill's successor in Yorkshire, Jack Taylor, to match Scargill.
 "I were thinking when Jack got up," make us get to our feet.",
That were one of the best nights in my life, the charge we gave Arthur he gave it straight back to us."
What had excited him was the message —"it's us against them.
That gave me a charge that we could take back to our members.
It were enough for me to take back to our branch and say "it's us against them" ."
I got a real feeling of class anger and class loyalty, of belonging to a class, even.
Quite something to witness, and often not part of feminists' vocabulary.
It was an amazing meeting, very much a men's meeting.
The Scottish miners' leader, Mick McGahey, granite-faced and gravel-voiced, brought them to their feet when he concluded: "This is a united executive.
We'll halt the retreat and start the fightback in the Labour Movement."
The roadshow now belongs to the mythology of the miners, the leadership had made the effort, they'd gone on the road, and they'd been rewarded by a clutch of standing ovations.
What really moved the men was the ignition of the class war, the excitement of climbing out of the trenches for the long march against the class enemy.
Both the Right and the Left share the same awe at the thought of the miners on the move — they bring down governments, they are the labour movement's prizefighters, our local heroes.
But the miners' roadshow didn't work.
The attempt to bolster the pay claim with the fear of closures failed.
Having hauled themselves to the top of the manual workers' pay league, the reduction of miners' political offensive to an economic demand foundered on the success of economism during the 1972 and 1974 pay offensives.
Having secured miners' place at the top of the manual wages league, there was nowhere for that economism to go.
The conviction that what moves men is money became a commandment among the Left of the labour movement during the unprecedented waves of industrial militancy in the 1960s and 1970s.
And even though it was obvious to many before the 1982 ballot that the miners were not ready to go over the barricades for a pay rise, the Left leadership couldn't think its way out of its own economism.
On the way home from the Sheffield spectacular, I talked to a veteran Communist miner, thrilled at the thought of "the movement" when it's moving.
I enjoyed his excitement with politics.
Class lives.
But he corrected me when I mused on the potency of class hatred and class anger in the Sheffield meeting.
 "No lass, you're wrong, it wasn't class hatred, it was class love." 
He was right; certainly there wasn't what goes with class hatred, class envy.
And it was lovely to hear a middle-aged man talk about love as instrumental in men's politics.
But he was also wrong.
It was a love of miners.
I went home to the woman I'm staying with, a single parent with three children aged between two and nine years.
She doesn't get a newspaper and had to ask the social  security for new shoes for the two children at school where their last pair of trainers got holes.
Today she was up at the crack of dawn, 4.30, to make breakfast for her man friend.
He'd come round the night before after playing pool, and they'd stayed up late, so today she is shattered.
I arrived home at about tea-time, we talked a bit, the children were charging around until about 7 p.m., when they had their baths, and by 9 p.m. they were in bed.
By then I was in front of the television with tea and biscuits watching the news.
That felt quite odd.
I've noticed how rarely women watch the news.
There were two major reports on the news, one showing mass rallies in Spain on the eve of the elections there, hundreds of thousands of ordinary people crammed into sports stadia to hear their party leaders, and the other on the miners' ballot, with interviews among the miners who travelled in busloads from coalfields in Derbyshire and Lancashire for the Sheffield rally, interviews with Michael McGahey on the road about the vilification of Scargill, and the sight of Scargill himself appealing to the miners to vote for their union and against the National Coal Board.
The miners' ballot counted as a matter of national public concern, a mini-general election.
But unlike the Spanish rallies, there were almost no women at Sheffield.
The woman I'm staying with comes from a mining family, and as I was watching the news I heard the ironing board creaking in the kitchen.
She was still working, doing the ironing at ten o'clock at night.
She missed the news.
It had nothing to do with her anyway.
The following day brought the news of the miners' ballot — despite everything I've said, the news was terrible.
There was no comfort in that result, a vote against industrial action, even though it confirmed the suspicion that gone are the old ways of fighting the class war that we've all been raised on and still have the power to excite me.
Because they did try.
I'm very glad to have been at that rally in Sheffield, because it was a historic moment.
But it's reminded me of one of my father's books about the First World War, in which the author writes about the demise of a certain kind of army and a certain kind of warfare: cavalries organised in elegant  formation for the war of movement.
The thrill of the rallies before the miners' ballot was that they evoked echoes of that kind of military manoeuvre, disciplined, exotic troops, mobilised in precise, obedient formation, like ballroom dancing.
The rhetoric of the rallies had a kind of doom about them.
The very optimism of the possibility that the miners might be on the move against the government carried with it a premonition of pessimism, that the miners would save the working class when it could not save itself.
But meanwhile, the hospital workers had been dug in for another kind of long war which can't be won the miners' way.
Round about the time of the miners' ballot, hospital workers were holding meetings in South Yorkshire hospitals where only months earlier they had voted for all-out strike action.
Now they were holding awkward, sometimes acrimonious meetings, badly managed and very sad, because they knew it was all over bar the shouting.
None of us expected the hospital workers to save us from Thatcher, and yet they tried harder than most.
The odds stacked against them show that industrial action today needs a leap of the political intellect.
It needs more than will, it needs the imagination to find a way.
The miners offered to support the hospital workers.
Did they also wonder if they had anything to learn from them?
A young lodge leader in Barnsley took a party of us down his colliery.
We were all women, including the daughter of a miner, who had been married to a miner and whose son was now a miner.
Her home overlooks the pithead and the haunting winding gear of a colliery where an explosion once killed over thirty miners.
We also included some women workers from the canteen and a cousin of one of the miners.
As we swept down to the seam in the old iron lift we all grabbed each other 's hands in simultaneous panic.
After we came up out of the dank womb of the pit, we went for a drink in the welfare club.
Apart from the barmaid, we were the only women there, and the two youngest women in our group had a long discussion: one defended the secret solidarity of the men, the other said, "it's no place for a woman, I couldn't stand it." 
She's working as a secretary in a solicitor's office now.