

Mouse husbandry
COLIN M. HETHERINGTON
1.
INTRODUCTION
The mouse is the most commonly used laboratory mammal.
Due to its small size and high fecundity it is relatively cheap to breed, buy and maintain.
Many strains of mice have been bred in laboratories for over 50 years and there are now several hundred inbred, congenic, recombinant inbred, outbred and mutant strains.
The genetics and characteristics of many of these strains are extensively documented (1.2).
2.
HUSBANDRY
2.1 Source of mice and general health measures
A regular and reliable supply of healthy, genetically-defined animals is essential to a successful research project.
Depending on circumstances it may be more effective to either purchase animals from a commercial breeder or to breed  one's own animals.
If a suitable source of commercially bred animals is available and occasional large batches of age-matched animals are required, the purchase of mice may be the most efficient and cost-effective approach.
If animals are used on a more regular basis there may be advantages in breeding the animals.
It is important that the animals are healthy at the outset and that they remain healthy.
Maintenance of health in the long term depends on the management protocols which control the  animals' welfare and staff access.
Mice are kept under a variety of conditions.
Animals from a basic facility with a minimum of procedures to prevent infections are known as "conventional" animals, while those bred or maintained under conditions where precautions are taken to avoid infections are know as "barrier" bred or maintained.
The term specified pathogen free (SPF) is also used to describe barrier bred animals.
In this instance health reports specify the pathogens which have been shown to be absent from the animals.
These include ecto- and endoparasites, such as mites and intestinal worms and protozoa, certain bacteria, mycoplasmas and viruses.
Gnotobiotic animals are bred in isolators and their microbiological flora is known.
Axenic mice are also isolator bred and are free of all organisms (i.e. germ free).
The form of animal husbandry adopted depends on the type of facilities available and the nature of the experiments.
If an experiment produces animals that are to be kept for a long period, or that are to form the basis of a breeding colony.
some form of barrier system is essential.
If no precautions are taken to prevent infections it is inevitable that the health of the animals will deteriorate with a resulting decrease in breeding performance or death.
A minimal barrier system requires people entering the animal area to remove their laboratory coats worn in other areas, and to put on protective  clothing.
It is essential that they wash their hands thoroughly before handling the animals and the wearing of surgical gloves and a change of footwear or overshoes should be considered.
A more stringent barrier includes the requirement for staff to shower on entering the unit and a complete change of clothes.
Whatever the precautions adopted it is sensible that the breeding animals receive the highest protection and staff not directly involved with breeding should not enter the breeding area.
Whenever possible breeding colony staff should not be involved with other animals of a potentially lower health status.
Precautions for experimental animals will inevitably be less stringent to allow access to scientists and their technicians.
In general however the greater the number of people entering an area the greater the risk of the introduction of an infection.
2.2 Caging
Mouse cages are available in various shapes, sizes and designs.
The two most useful sizes are probably those with a floor area of 200 cm2 or 1200 cm2 and 12 cm high (internal measurements).
The former provides accommodation for breeding pairs or trios or up to five adult mice while the latter is used for up to 25 stock mice depending on their size.
Boxes are available made of clear polycarbonate, opaque polypropylene or metal.
They may have solid or grid bases.
There is little to suggest which the mice prefer, and cages are chosen to suit the management system and the scientists' preference.
Polypropylene cages with stainless steel grid lids and solid bases are the most common type but if, for example, cages are to be autoclaved regularly, metal cages may be more appropriate.
Cages with grid bases can be used for stock but are not recommended for breeding cages.
Special cages have been developed for wild mice to reduce the need for handling during cleaning but it is possible to keep them in standard mouse cages.
Cages may be held on wall-mounted racks, allowing easy floor cleaning and the recapture of escaped animals, or on trolleys designed for the purpose.
2.3 Bedding
Bedding is usually of woodchips or shavings.
The wood must be free of insecticides and herbicides.
Allergies to wood dust can develop in staff and consideration should be given to using dust-free sawdust and to the staff wearing masks when handling the dry bedding.
Other absorbent materials are available for bedding, but problems can arise when they are used in breeding cages as they can desiccate the pups.
Shredded paper or tissues can be provided for nesting material.
2.4 Diets
Nutrition is a very important factor in the breeding and maintenance of mice in good health and fertility.
Various commercial mouse diets are available.
Some are manufactured for breeding animals and others for stock.
They are supplied as pellets, of various shapes and sizes, or powders.
Expanded pelleted diets result in less wastage by the animals, but food hoppers hold a smaller weight of food.
Diets for autoclaving are supplemented with nutrients to compensate for the inevitable degradation that occurs.
Some diets are coated by the manufacturer to prevent the pellets sticking together during autoclaving.
The physical changes to diet pellets brought about by autoclaving depends  both on the constitution of the diet and the sterilizing and drying cycle of the autoclave.
A diet should always be tested in the autoclave that will normally be used to ensure that it is acceptable both nutritionally and physically after sterilization.
It may be necessary to spread the diet on trays in the autoclave to prevent clumping of the pellets.
Some diets may emerge so hard that it is impossible for them to be eaten by weanling mice.
Diets sterilized by irradiation are commercially available.
It is important to ensure that the packaging of irradiated diets is intact and the contents are therefore sterile before use.
2.5 Water
Water can be provided by water bottles or by automatic watering systems.
Whichever system is used it is vital that leaking water is avoided.
There is a real risk of mice, especially young animals, drowning or dying from the effects of a soaking if a bottle or nozzle of an automatic system leaks.
The domestic water supply should be checked to determine whether it requires additional treatment before use.
This is particularly true for a barrier maintained breeding facility.
In Britain the domestic supply is normally adequate.
Acidification, chlorination, ultraviolet light or filtration can be used to improve the microbiological status of the supply (3).
Water for mice in gnotobiotic isolators must be sterile.
2.6 Animal room environment
Forced air ventilation is required to remove odours and allergens.
The room temperature should be maintained at 21 ± 2°C and the relative humidity at 55 ± 10%.
The current trend is towards greater environmental control and full air conditioning is recommended.
It is important that air is distributed evenly throughout the room and that the animals are not exposed to drafts.
The number of air changes per hour that are required is dependent on the stocking density and the effectiveness of the air distribution within the room.
Sixteen air changes per hour in a room containing 150–175 mice/m2 of floor space is adequate provided the cages are cleaned regularly.
It should be noted that the microclimate in the cage may differ significantly from that of the room with significantly higher temperature, humidity and ammonia concentration in the cage.
To ensure a regular supply of embryos at a constant development stage at the same time of day throughout the year, a constant lighting regime is required.
Mouse rooms should therefore have no windows.
The light cycle most commonly used is 12 h dark/12 h light.
See also Section 5.2.
2.7 Fumigation of rooms
Inevitably with time the health status of an animal colony will deteriorate.
In an experimental facility without breeding animals the health status can be restored if healthy animals are issued into a clean fumigated or disinfected room, and the infected room is gradually emptied as experiments are terminated.
It is essential during the period that the clean and infected room are both in use that a strict barrier is maintained between them.
Once the room has been emptied it can be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected or fumigated.
The method adopted will depend on the ability to isolate the room and its ventilation system from the rest of the building.
If the room can be effectively sealed, formaldehyde fumigation, which is probably the most effective method, is feasible.
Formaldehyde may be generated in various ways.
Among these is heating a solution of formaldehyde in a suitable container with an electric heating element, or mixing two parts formaldehyde with one part of potassium permanganate and allowing the oxidative reaction to volatilize the formaldehyde.
A relative humidity of 75% or more will increase the effectiveness of the procedure.
Once the formaldehyde has been liberated the room should be sealed and left for 24 h.
Great care is required during fumigation and it is recommended that a suitable respirator is worn.
10 ml of formaldehyde are required for every cubic metre of room.
If the formaldehyde is to be liberated by heat a 10% solution of the commercially available formaldehyde should be used in order to raise the humidity simultaneously.
Alternatively, or if the room cannot be sealed, it can be disinfected using an agent such as Tegodor, a combination of formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde and quaternary compounds (Th.
Goldschmidt Ltd., York House, Station Rd, Harrow, Middlesex.) with a pressure spray or logger.
A respirator is again advised.
3.
HANDLING MICE
3.1 Approach
(i) Lift the mouse from the cage with the base of the tail held between thumb and forefinger, and transfer to a grid cage top (Figure 1a) or a surface that it can   grasp (e.g. the sleeve of a laboratory coat).
The mouse's natural response is to move away from the handler and while pulling gently backwards on the tail the mouse can be pinned to the grid between the thumb and bent forefinger of the free hand.
(ii) Allow the skin of the neck to slip in a controlled fashion between thumb and finger until the scruff is held tightly behind the ears.
(iii) Grip the tail between the 4th and 5th fingers and the palm of the hand (Figure lb).
If the handler tries simply to grasp the scruff or does not hold it tight behind the ears he is liable to be bitten.
Procedures such as ear clipping, s.c.
and i.p. injections and palpation can be carried out with the mouse held as in Figure 1.
When working with mice in an isolator they may be picked up by the base of their tail using a pair of large forceps with rubber sleeves on their tips.
Wild mice are more difficult to handle because they jump.
It is advisable to place the cage in a deep box before removing the lid.
When transferring animals between cages it may be found easier to coax them into a bottle than to handle them.
3.2 Identification
There are two common systems used to identify mice, ear clipping with or without toe clipping.
Combining ear and toe clipping it is possible to achieve identifying numbers up to 9999 (Figure 2).
There is always the risk of an ear being torn or chewed, and records should be kept of the animals in each cage.
Newborn mice may be identified by toe clipping.
3.3 Injections
A 25 or 27 gauge (0.5 or 0.4 mm) needle should be used.
Care must be taken to ensure that there are no air bubbles trapped in the syringe or needle.
Intraperitoneal injections are given while holding the animal as in Figure lb on its back with the head slightly down.
The site of injection should be 2 — 3 mm lateral to the umbilicus.
Subcutaneous injections can be in the scruff of the neck close to the handler's thumb while holding the mouse firmly on a surface that it can grasp.
3.4 Euthanasia
Mice may be easily killed by cervical dislocation.
(i) Pick up the animal to be killed by the base of its tail as described in Section 3.1.
(ii) Instead of grasping the scruff of the neck, firmly pinch the neck while pulling steadily on the base of the tail.
Alternatively hold a rod or ruler across the neck while the tail is pulled.
If large numbers of animals are to be killed a euthanasia chamber can be used consisting of a container linked to a cylinder of carbon dioxide.
Place the animals to be killed in the container and displace the air by carbon dioxide.
Care must be taken to ensure that the animals are dead prior to disposal and it should be noted that mice 1 — 8 days old take longer to die than adults.
See also Section 8.
4.
BREEDING
Mice will breed from 6 to 8 weeks of age and continue for about 200 days depending on the strain.
The gestation period of the mouse is 20 days and parturition is often associated with a post-partum oestrus.
Concurrent lactation and pregnancy can result in delayed implantation (i.e. embryos remain viable but blocked at the blastocyst stage during lactation).
Mice are commonly bred in pairs, trios (one male with two females) or harems (one male with more than two females).
It is advisable not to put more than one male in a breeding cage as the males of a number of strains will fight.
It should be noted that for the maximum production per female, pair mating is best.
Other mating ratios produce a higher number of animals weaned per cage, but the pre-weaning mortality will be higher.
Mice are weaned at approximately 3 weeks of age and should be removed from the breeding cage before the birth of the subsequent litter.
To prevent fighting, male mice are caged together from weaning.
Adult males from different cages should not be mixed.
Breeding records are kept so that unproductive animals can be identified and culled.
Breeding females with litter intervals of over 40 days should be culled.
The breeding system adopted depends on the number of animals required and whether they are of an inbred or outbred strain.
An inbred mouse strain must be maintained by full sib mating (brother x sister) while an outbred strain must be maintained in such a way that inbreeding is minimized.
For details of various systems of breeding consult references 1 and 4.
Wild mice may be kept and bred in standard mouse cages, but one must remember their jumping ability.
5.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
5.1 Stud males
Stud males are test mated to ensure fertility and a record kept of their mating performance to ensure that they are working effectively.
The record should include not only the fact that they mate regularly but also that matings are fertile.
5.2 Timed matings
The oestrus cycle of the mouse is normally 4 days, and females are receptive to mating only at oestrus.
If a regular daily supply of mated animals is required it is sufficient to set up a series of cages with one male and three females in each, bearing in mind that in theory one in four females should be in oestrus on a particular day.
A ratio of one male to three females per cage will usually produce the best results in the majority of strains.
If a group of mated animals is required for a particular day it is possible to increase the probability of mating using the Whitten effect (5).
When a group of female mice is placed with a male their oestrus cycles become synchronized and the majority of animals will mate on the third night.
This phenomenon can be used to increase the number of animals mating on a particular day.
A male is caged on one side of a barrier separating him from the females in the same cage for 2 days.
The females are allowed to mate on the third day (6).
Alternatively it is possible to check females and mate up only those animals that are in oestrus.
The oestrus cycle may be followed by observing changes in the appearance of the vagina.
At oestrus the vagina is gaping, the tissue is pink, slightly moist and with pronounced striations.
When mice mate the ejaculate of the male coagulates in the vagina of the female producing a copulation plug.
By checking female mice for the presence of a plug it is possible to determine whether the animal has mated.
Sometimes the plug is easily visible but normally a probe is used to detect its presence in the vagina.
The plug remains in the vagina for varying lengths of time (up to I 8 h).
The sooner the animals are checked after mating the less the likelihood of the plug falling out prior to detection.
Mice normally mate during the middle of the dark period of the diurnal cycle.
Various systems of defining the time of mating and the age of the embryos are in use.
The day of finding the vaginal plug may be designated day 0, day ½, day I, or the first day of pregnancy in different laboratories.
The time of mating can be changed relative to the working day by changing the diurnal light/dark cycle.
Thus by completely reversing the cycle, mating will occur around midday.
Changes in the diurnal cycle allow different developmental stages of embryos to be available during normal working hours.
If animals are brought in from another establishment whose diurnal light/dark cycle is different or unknown a few days should be allowed for the mice to acclimatize.
5.3 Pseudopregnancy and vasectomy
Pseudopregnant animals are produced in a similar system as in Section 5.2 but the mating is with vasectomized males.
Male mice are easiest to vasectomize at about 6 weeks of age before they become fat.
The males to be vasectomized should be of a strain or genotype with a good breeding  performance.
Vasectomy is carried out under anaesthesia through a single transverse ventral incision.
It is possible to locate the vas deferens by manipulating the fat pad and without exteriorizing the testes.
A short length of each vas deferens should be removed to ensure that sperm cannot pass between the severed ends.
Ligation of the vas is unnecessary.
The incision in the skin can be closed using suture thread or suture clips (Michell 12 mm).
The latter should be removed after 12 days.
There is no need to sew the body wall.
The vasectomized animals should be test mated to check that they are sterile.
5.4 Superovulation
If large numbers of pre-implantation embryos are required at one time the gonadotropins PMSG (pregnant mare's serum gonadotropin as Gestyl from Organon or Folligon from Intervet Laboratories Limited) and hCG (human chorionic gonadotropin from Sigma or Intervet Laboratories Limited) can be administered to females prior to mating in order to increase the ovulation rate.
Successful induction of superovulation depends on several variables including age, weight and strain of mouse, and the time of injection of the gonadotropins.
The best age for superovulation is usually in the range of 3 — 5 weeks the optimum for a given genotype being within 4–6 days.
Body weight is often a better indication of development in certain strains and if commercially bred animals are used weight may be the only available measure of developmental age.
The time of administration of the gonadotropins relative to each other and the light cycle of the mouse room affects both the number of eggs ovulated and their developmental uniformity.
A 40–46 h interval between the PMSG and hCG injections will usually be found optimal.
Ovulation normally occurs between 10 and 13 h after hCG injection.
To obtain the best synchronization and yield it is important that the hCG is administered before the release of endogenous luteinizing hormone (LH) which is regulated by the diurnal light/dark cycle.
It is generally assumed that endogenous LH release occurs IS -20 h after the midpoint of the second dark period following PMSG administration.
Thus a feasible injection schedule for animals held in a room with a light period from 0800 h to 2000 h would be PMSG between 1500 and 1600 h and hCG 46 h later between 1300 and 1400 h.
This would be about 3 — 4 h before endogenous LH release.
The dose of both PMSG and hCG should generally be 2–5 IU i.p.
Different strains and hybrids respond quite differently to a given dose.
After hCG injection the females should be caged individually with proven stud males and checked for vaginal plugs on the following morning.
5.5 Anaesthetics
Although mice are probably the most frequently anaesthetized animals in laboratory work, it is still difficult to achieve true surgical anaesthesia without some mortality.
Apart from anaesthetic overdose the most common cause of death during anaesthesia is hypothermia.
There are marked variations in response to anaesthetics associated with strain, age, sex, weight and nutritional status.
Among the anaesthetics that are commonly used are pentobarbitone, tribromoethanol  (Avertin) and fentanyl-fluanisone (Hypnorm, Crown Chemical Co.
Limited) with midazolam (Hypnovel, Roche)(7,8).
Pentobarbitone can be prepared from powder at 5 mg/ml in warm normal saline or as a 1/10 dilution of the commercial stock solution (60 mg/ml).
The effective dose varies with so many factors that a control group of the same strain, age, sex and weight should be anaesthetized prior to the experimental animals to determine the correct dose.
The dose required is normally in the range 0.7-I .0 mg for a 25 g mouse.
Tribromoethanol may be made as follows.
(i) Prepare a 100% solution by mixing 10 g, of tribromoethyl alcohol with 10 ml of tertiary amyl alcohol.
(ii) For use dilute the stock solution to 2.5% with sterile water or normal saline.
(iii) Keep both the stock and diluted solutions at 4-C in the dark.
There may be considerable variation between preparations and, as with pentobarbitone, variation between animals, so a test group should again be used.
The dose required should be about 3.0 mg for a 25g mouse.
Tribromoethanol has been reported to be irritant to the viscera of mice and this can cause intestinal problems and death.
This side effect seems to be strain dependent.
Fentanyl-fluanisone with midazolam probably provides the best available surgical anaesthesia.
The commercial preparations should each be doubly diluted with sterile water (for injection) and then equal volumes mixed together.
The resulting mixture contains 0.5 mg/ml midazolam, 2.5 mg/ml fluanisone and 0.079 mg/ml fentanyl citrate.
This mixture is stable at room temperature for at least 8 weeks.
A 25 g mouse requires an injection i.p. of 0.1–0.2 ml of this mixture.
Ether is irritant to the mouse respiratory tract and can cause excessive mucous secretion.
It is difficult to maintain a consistent level of surgical anaesthesia with ether and it is in addition highly explosive.
It is not recommended.
Chloroform should not be used under any circumstances.
Not only is it hepatotoxic but trace concentrations have been shown to interfere seriously with the breeding performance of male mice.
It is essential that anaesthetized mice are kept warm on a heated pad under a light or preferably in an incubator until they recover consciousness.
5.6 Re-derivation by hysterectomy
Caesarian re-derivation of a mouse breeding colony is the most effective method to restore its health status.
A breeding colony of the required or higher health status is needed to provide foster mothers.
If a successful operation is to be carried out it is essential that newborn litters in the foster colony are synchronized with full term pregnant females of the strain to be re-derived.
The animal to undergo the Caesarian is selected by palpation.
Timed matings can be used to aid synchronization, but palpation is always advisable owing to the normal spread in the time of parturition.
A full term pregnant female may be palpated while held as shown in Figure lb. the uterus is gently felt between the thumb and forefinger of the free hand.
At around the 18th and 19th day of pregnancy the individual conceptuses can be felt as small spheres.
Immediately prior to parturition the fetuses lie in an elongated position and can be  moved slightly within the uterine lumen.
This is the time at which the Caesarian operation should be performed.
An animal that is overtly unhealthy or has already started to give birth should not be used.
An isolation area is used to house the foster mothers and re-derived litters until it can be confirmed that their health status has not been compromised as a result of the procedure.
The actual operation can be performed in various ways depending on circumstances and the final health status to be achieved.
Most commonly it is carried out on the open bench or in a laminar flow sterile cabinet.
Prior to the operation a sterile screw-capped container is prepared containing a disinfectant solution of 10% formaldehyde and 10% liquid soap, as a wetting agent, in sterile water at 36 C. A 500 ml beaker containing about 250 ml of the same solution is also required.
The abdomen of the pregnant mouse should be shaved.
(i) Kill the mouse by cervical dislocation, immediately dip it in the disinfectant solution in the beaker, blot to remove excess liquid and transfer to a sterile operating surface.
(ii) Expose the body wall by grasping the skin of the abdomen immediately above and below the midline with fingers and thumb and pulling simultaneously towards the head and feet (this procedure can be made easier if a small midline knick is first made in the skin with a pair of scissors).
(iii) Make a longitudinal incision in the body wall and expose the uterus.
(iv) Hold the vagina with forceps and cut caudally.
While gradually raising the uterus, trim the  mesentery away.
Take care not to puncture the uterine wall.
In this way the uterus is removed without touching any surfaces.
Provided the skin is peeled well out of the way any areas which the uterus might touch should in any case, be sterile.
(v) Transfer the uterus to the disinfectant in the screw-capped container and take to the vicinity of the foster mother.
This might be via a dunk tank or entry port to an isolator or simply to a clean isolation room.
(vi) Tip the uterus into a suitable dish, remove from the disinfectant and blot lightly.
(vii) Place it on a sterile surface, slit it longitudinally along the anti-mesometrial surface, and remove the fetuses from their membranes with the aid of a second pair of scissors and forceps.
The umbilical cord should be crushed and torn, rather than cut, to prevent bleeding.
(viii) Dry the pups with tissues and gently stimulate with a tissue or surgical swab until they are pink and breathing regularly.
Breathing can be stimulated by gently squeezing the tail, and if the pup squeaks it is most likely to survive.
The complete procedure from cervical dislocation of the mother to delivery of the last pup should take less than 4–4.5 min.
It is possible to foster pups with a mother whose natural litter would be 2 — 3 days old but the success rate is lower.
The foster mothers and re-derived litter should be held in isolation until their health status has been shown to be satisfactory.
If some of the mother's natural young have been left in the litter these can be used for health screening.
5.7 Fostering
Fostering may be used during hysterectomy re-derivation and in situations where the natural mother is unable to rear her own litter due to her own health, genetic defects, or because the litter is too small to maintain lactation.
Mice may be fostered at birth or at any time prior to weaning.
The natural litter of the foster mother should be about the same age as the animals to be fostered.
The strain of the foster colony is chosen for good mothering ability and preferably the coat colour should be different from the animals to be fostered, or the mating arranged so that the natural young of the foster mother are not of the same coat colour as the pups to be fostered.
If the foster mother's young are a different coat colour from the pups to be fostered it is possible to leave a few natural young with the mother and add those to be fostered.
If more than one foster mother is available the risk of cannibalism or neglect can be reduced by introducing a few pups to be fostered into each litter.
If there is no alternative to using a foster mother whose natural litter is the same colour as the mice to be fostered great care must be taken to mark the fostered animals by toe clipping or all the natural young must be removed.
When fostering a new born animal toe clipping is not recommended as it may encourage cannibalism.
In these circumstances it is essential to ensure that the foster mother has finished giving birth and that all her natural young are removed.
The genetic authenticity of the re-derived animals should always be confirmed after weaning.
6.
TRANSPORTATION
Mice can be easily transported by road, rail or air.
Suitable transport boxes usually made of polypropylene or cardboard with and without filters on the air vents are commercially available (Williton Box Co.
Ltd., Williton, Somerset).
Transport isolators may also be used to maintain the health status of the animals.
It is important to ensure that the boxes or other containers conform to the requirements of the shipping agent (e.g. IATA regulations for air and British Rail regulations).
The animals are packed with sufficient food and a source of moisture for the complete journey allowing for possible delays.
Water is provided as moistened food contained in a thin plastic sachet (9) or 1 % reconstituted gelatine in a suitable container.
Alternatively, for short journeys, a piece of potato or apple is provided, but remember when sending animals abroad that there may be regulations governing the importation of vegetable matter.
The labels on the boxes should include the address and telephone number of the sender and the consignee, a description of the contents (species, strain, age, number) and the number of boxes in the consignment.
In order to avoid the boxes being opened in transit the label should state that sufficient food and water has been provided for the journey.
This is especially important if animals of a particular health status are being shipped in Filtered boxes or transport isolators as inadvertent opening of the container may render the animals valueless.
Also a label is included stating clearly: Urgent Live Animals.
The person due to receive the animals should be consulted to ascertain the documentation required.
This may include a statement confirming that the animals are healthy and fit to travel and an import licence.
Some countries require a health certificate signed by a Veterinary Inspector of the Ministry of Agriculture while others will accept a statement signed, for example, by a veterinary surgeon or the head of the animal facility.
If animals are to be sent abroad all the necessary documentation must be arranged prior to shipping and the necessary papers must travel with the animals.
7.
IMPORTATION
Whenever animals are to be brought into an animal house from an outside source it is advisable to keep them in strict isolation for 28 days while health checks are carried out.
This is especially important if the mice have come from a source that is not usually used and if the health status of the colony of origin is unknown.
If animals are to be imported into the UK an importation licence issued by the Ministry of Agriculture under the Rabies (Importation of Dogs, Cats and other Mammals) Order (1974) is required.
It is also necessary for the animals to be kept in premises registered under this Act and for the animals to be moved from the port of entry to the registered premises in a registered vehicle.
The mice must then be kept in quarantine for 6 months.
When mice are imported from abroad it must either be possible to carry out experiments in the quarantine facility or a breeding colony should be imported.
It is permissible to remove mice born in quarantine 3 weeks after weaning with the permission of the Ministry of Agriculture.
8.
LEGISLATION GOVERNING EXPERIMENTAL ANIMALS
It is essential to ensure prior to starting an experiment that you will not be contravening any national or international regulations governing the use of animals for scientific purposes.
In the UK the relevant legislation, administered by the Home Office is the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986.
Mice must be obtained from breeding or supplying establishments designated under the Act and the experimental animal facilities must also be designated.
If breeding is part of the experimental protocol then the premises must be designated for both breeding and scientific procedures.
The  experimenter must also possess the necessary licences (e.g. Project licence and Personal licence).
In addition it should be noted that this Act also sets out in Schedule 2 approved methods of euthanasia.
Isolation, culture and manipulation of pre-implantation mouse embryos
HESTER P.M.PRATT
1.
INTRODUCTION
There are two broad areas of developmental research that require in vitro culture of pre-implantation embryos, namely, the study of the embryo as an autonomously differentiating system (1,2), and the use of the early embryo as a vehicle for gene insertion in the production of transgenic mice (see Chapter 11).
This chapter describes in some detail the procedures for isolation of eggs and pre-implantation embryos, and for the manipulation and observation of embryos at various stages of development.
Three points should be made at the outset.
(i) Mouse development has tended to become the paradigm of pre-implantation mammalian embryogenesis.
This has arisen because, with the exception of the rabbit and possibly the human (see Chapter 14), the mouse is the only species that can be cultured in vitro over the entire pre-implantation period.
However, it should be noted that conclusions derived from mouse embryos are not necessarily applicable to mammals in general.
(ii) Embryos tend to develop more slowly in vitro in the chemically defined media currently in use than they do in vivo, suggesting that optimal growth and development may require specific factors from the reproductive tract.
(iii) A mention must be made of the benefits of accurate and regular observation.
Familiarity with the material generates the skill necessary to distinguish between normal and abnormal development and to assess the developmental stage that the embryos have reached.
2.
RECOVERY OF EMBRYOS
Conditions for the removal and culture of embryos need not necessarily be aseptic but should be dust free and as clean as possible.
Since cultures are unlikely to be maintained for more than 4 or 5 days they can generally be kept free of bacterial contamination by conducting all manipulations in sterile media with flame-pulled glass mouth pipettes under dissecting microscopes in a dust-free area, for example surrounded by Perspex dust covers.
Details of reagents, media and equipment are given in Section 5.
Eggs and embryos (particularly during the 1-cell and 2-cell stages) are extremely sensitive to environmental stress.
During conventional culture there are likely to be fluctuations in temperature necessitated by frequent removal from the incubator for observation.
The most obvious consequence of such shifts in temperature is an artefactual  lengthening of the G2 and M phases of the cell cycle (3).
One way to overcome this problem is to equip all dissecting microscopes with heated stages set to 36 = 1 C, and to pre-equilibrate all media at 37 C.
There is no generally accepted optimal culture medium and different laboratories have adopted slightly different formulations to give developmental rates comparable with in vivo growth.
The essential common features are bicarbonate buffer, presence of lactate and pyruvate and a macromolecule [generally bovine serum albumin (BSA)].
The differences lie in the concentrations of these and other components as well as variations in the final osmolarity of the media (discussed in refs 4,5).
The exact procedure employed to recover embryos varies according to the developmental stage and specific details will be dealt with in sequence.
In broad outline the process involves collecting the embryos into warm (37-C) Hepes-buffered recovery medium containing BSA (M2 + BSA) using a flame-pulled glass Pasteur pipette attached to a mouth piece.
Debris is removed by repeated passage of the embryos through warm (37 -C) wash drops of M2 + BSA followed by a rinse in the bicarbonate-buffered culture medium (M I 6 + BSA).
Embryos are finally transferred into drops of M 16 + BSA (-50 u1) under paraffin oil in plastic Petri dishes, and incubated at 37 -C in an atmosphere of 5% C02 in air.
This method of culture is the most convenient if repeated access is required for observation or manipulation.
In a busy laboratory large numbers of Petri dishes can accumulate quite rapidly and the most convenient and safest way of storing and retrieving them from the incubator is to stack the dishes on narrow Perspex trays which extend the depth of the incubator.
If frequent access to embryos is necessary it is advisable to have these in a second incubator designated for short-term cultures thereby ensuring that the long-term cultures remain undisturbed and enjoy greater stability of C02 levels and temperature.
2.1 Fertilized and unfertilized eggs
2.
I.l In vivo mating
The procedures for setting up matings in response to natural or experimentally induced ovulation (superovulation) are dealt with in Chapter 1, Section 5.
Our experience shows that stud males only mate efficiently if they are used regularly but not more frequently than alternate nights.
Superovulation is a useful device for increasing the numbers of eggs and embryos obtained from young (3–4 weeks) mice (for discussion of the factors involved see ref. 6).
To obtain good synchronization of fertilization and hence of subsequent development, the hormone injection schedule should ensure that mating occurs prior to ovulation (i.e. fresh eggs are fertilized immediately) and that ovulation is timed to occur in response to the injected hormone and not the surge of endogenous luteinizing hormone (LH).
An appropriate schedule is presented in Chapter I (Section 5.4).
If embryos of developmental ages different from these are required, the necessary deviation from this injection regime will produce a more asynchronous population due to the spread in time during which ovulation and fertilization will occur.
Methods for synchronizing such embryos and their component cells are dealt with in Sections 3.1 and 3.2.
It is always wise to question the normality of embryos developing from  superovulated eggs and to use the appropriate criteria under study to compare them with naturally ovulated eggs.
To recover fertilized or unfertilized eggs carry out the following procedure:
(i) Kill the female mice by cervical dislocation, dissect out the oviducts and place then, in warn,(37-C) saline or M2 + BSA (Section 5).
Manipulate the oviducts in a plastic Petri dish or glass cavity block on the heated stage of a binocular directing microscope.
If ovulation has occurred within the past 10 h (approximately) the masses of cumulus cells surrounding the eggs will be clearly visible through the thin distended walls of the ampulla.
(ii) Release the cumulus masses in M2 + BSA culture medium by tearing the walls of the ampulla with fine watchmaker's forceps.
(iii) Remove as much medium as possible (without flattening the eggs by drawing the meniscus too low) and replace it with approximately 1 ml of warm (37-C) hyaluronidase solution (Table 4).
The cumulus cells will disperse gradually to release the enclosed eggs over the next 2–4 min.
This process can be hastened by gentle pipetting of the egg masses through a wide bore glass mouth pipette.
Both cold and hyaluronidase treatment can activate unfertilized eggs so eggs must be kept warm and exposed to hyaluronidase for the minimum length of time.
(iv) After the eggs have settled to the bottom of the dish, replace as much of the hyaluronidase solution as possible with warm M2 + BSA, collect the eggs by mouth pipette and wash them free of cumulus cells by repeated passage through further washes of M2 + BSA.
(v) In cases where thousands of eggs need to be collected (e.g. for RNA extraction, see Chapter 9), it is more efficient to remove the cumulus cells by using a nylon mesh (mesh size 20–30 μm) inserted into the base of the barrel of a 5 or 10 ml plastic syringe.
Wet the mesh with medium, pass the medium containing the eggs through the mesh and collect the flow-through containing cumulus cells in a Petri dish.
Recover the eggs by inverting the mesh over a second Petri dish and passing fresh medium through it.
The eggs that are released should be largely free of cumulus cells but any contaminating cells can be removed using a mouth pipette.
(vi) If eggs are not recovered from oviducts until 10 h after injection of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) or later, endogenous enzymes will have liberated cumulus masses.
In this case the best method for recovering eggs is to use the flushing method described in Section 2.2 for cleavage stages followed by hyaluronidase treatment if necessary.
Fertilized eggs can be distinguished from those that are unfertilized within hours of fertilization by their prominent second polar body (Figure 1, panel 5).
(Frequently the first polar body degenerates in many strains of mice.)
These fertilized eggs can then be staged developmentally with reference to the presence and positions of the male and female pronuclei (Figure 1, panels 6 — 10).
The sequence of events during the 1-cell cycle (detailed timings are given in Table 1) is initiated by fertilization and is independent of the time of ovulation (8).
It is advisable to avoid fertilization of eggs ovulated   more than 12 h previously because of the increased incidence of spontaneous parthenogenetic activation of aged eggs (9) due in part to the gradual disorganization of the cytoskeleton (10).
Controlled experimental parthenogenetic activation of eggs is dealt with in Chapter 12.
2.1.2 In vitro fertilization
This method of obtaining eggs and embryos is convenient for two reasons.
It provides a more synchronous population than in vivo mating because fertilization, which initiates development (8), can be timed precisely.
Secondly, the procedure can be divorced from the normal day/night cycle, and thereby allow insemination of eggs at a time which permits study of a subsequent developmental stage during normal working hours.
The detailed procedure is given in Chapter 13, Section 6.2.
Our own procedure is similar and will not be reproduced in this chapter.
2.2 Cleavage stages (2-cell to 8-cell)
Development from the 2-cell stage to the late 8-cell/early 16-cell (morula) stage (Figure 1, panels 16 22) occurs in the oviduct over a period of approximately 47 h.
The second cell cycle, like the first, is relatively long (-20 h) whereas the third and subsequent cycles adopt the more conventional somatic cell cycle length of 12 h.
Thus populations of a particular stage should be recovered from oviducts at predictable times after hCG injection or the inferred time of fertilization in vivo.
However, this assumption does not take account of the substantial inter- and intra-embryo variation in developmental timing (assessed with respect to morphological and/or cell cycle stage) which is always encountered.
The heterogeneity between embryos is influenced by the asynchrony of fertilization (8) while the variation in cell cycle stage within an embryo appears to be due to intrinsic and heritable differences in the blastomeres (16).
Since a complete understanding of developmental mechanisms can only be obtained if the sequence and timing of events is known, methods for obtaining synchronized embryos and their constituent blastomeres have to be developed.
These methods are discussed in Sections 3.1 and 3.2.
The cleanest way of recovering embryos from the oviduct is to use a fine needle with attached syringe and to flush them out.
This requires some practise but once the skill is acquired it is far preferable to the alternative method which is to shred the oviduct with fine watchmakers forceps and collect the embryos from among the debris.
To remove embryos from oviducts carry out the following steps.
(i) Remove the oviduct by first cutting through the top of the uterus, leaving a small portion of it attached to the oviduct, and then dissecting the oviduct away from the ovary.
This must be done very carefully to ensure that the opening of the oviduct remains intact since it is extremely difficult to insert a needle once it has been damaged.
The most convenient needles for flushing oviducts are 30 gauge metal ones which have been cut and polished to give a straight (not bevelled) and smooth end.
(ii) Place the cut oviducts in a drop (just enough medium to cover the oviducts) of M2 + BSA (Table 5) in a plastic Petri dish on the heated stage of a binocular dissecting microscope.
If too much medium is used the oviducts may float around making the flushing manipulations much more difficult.
(iii) Use watchmaker's forceps to probe the oviduct and locate the end (this has the appearance of a ribbed sleeve in many strains of mice).
Then insert the flushing needle attached to a 1 ml syringe filled with M2 + BSA.
(iv) Flush 0.1 — 0.2 nil of medium through the needle.
If successful the oviduct should swell and medium containing embryos should be discharged through the cut end of the uterus.
(v) Separate the embryos from other cellular debris by mouth pipette, wash them through a warm pre-equilibrated drop of M16 + BSA (Table 5) and culture them in the same medium under paraffin oil at 37 C in 5% CO2 in air.
2.2.1 2-Cell block
At this point it is necessary to interpose an important note of caution.
For the majority of mouse strains, eggs or embryos placed in culture at any stage before the mid 2-cell stage will arrest development in the G2 phase of the second cell cycle-a phenomenon referred to as the 2-cell block (discussed in ref 17).
If recovery from the oviduct is delayed until embryos have reached the late 2-cell stage (-48 h post-hCG) then development in vitro in simple defined media is unimpaired.
There are however, a few strains of mice (mostly inbred strains or hybrids between inbred strains) whose eggs and embryos do not block at the two-cell stage (Table 2).
In our laboratory we use (C57BL x CBA/Cact") F1 hybrid females.
In a comparison between blocking and non-blocking strains of mice it was shown that the potential of embryos to arrest at the 2-cell stage is determined solely by the   genotype of the egg and occurs irrespective of the paternal or embryonic contribution (18).
In practical terms the 2-cell block phenomenon means that studies of the 1-cell to 2-cell transition including in vitro fertilization are best undertaken using eggs from a non-blocking strain [although the main features of development at this stage do not differ qualitatively between eggs from blocking and non-blocking strains (18)].
Furthermore if a blocking strain of mouse is used (if the mice are outbred this is most likely to be the case) then care must be taken to ensure that 2-cell stage embryos are recovered from the oviducts late enough in the second cell cycle to ensure their normal development to blastocysts in vitro.
This is likely to be approximately 36–40 h post-hCG but it is best determined by experiment on the particular strain of mouse available.
2.3 Morulae
The term "morula" is imprecise but generally refers to a compact aggregate of blastomeres (Figure 1, panels 21, 22).
Since this is a purely morphological description it can embrace all stages in development from compacted 8-cells to the 16- to 32-cell stage just prior to blastocoel formation.
By observing the development of embryos it, vitro during this period it is possible to make a rough assignment of their developmental stage since the component blastomeres flatten upon one another(compact) at the 8-cell stage but then decompact during mitosis to the 16-cell stage and then subsequently recompact again (Figure 2, panels 4–6; for timings see Table 1).
Late morulae are generally regarded as 16- to 32-cell embryos which have not cavitated and it is at this stage (-84 h post-hCG) that they pass through the uterotubal junction from the oviduct into the uterus.
When recovering embryos at this stage it is therefore advisable to flush not only the oviducts but both uterine horns as well(see Section 2.4).
2.4 Blastocysts
Embryos enter the uterus and start to cavitate (form a blastocoel) at about 94 h post-hCG when they contain approximately 32 cells (i.e. when most of the cells have reached the end of their fifth cell cycle, Table 1).
The blastocysts continue to expand as their component cells progress through the next two cell cycles (Figure 1, panels 23–25, Figure 2, panels 9 — I 0).
When they contain approximately I 28 cells (in the region of 120 h post-hCG) the zona pellucida starts to thin and blastocysts "hatch" .
(Figure 2, panel 11), attach to the uterine epithelium and begin the process of implantation.
Once this process is underway they cannot be dislodged by flushing the uterine horns.
It is therefore advisable to collect blastocysts well in advance of hatching and attachment  and allow then, to expand and hatch in vitro in a simple defined medium (e.g M16 + BSA Table 5) or hatch and outgrow in a more complex medium leg.
Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) + 10% fetal calf serum (FCS), see Section 3.5.2.
To recover blastocysts carry out the following steps.
(i) Dissect individual uterine horns away from underlying mesentery and cut at the uterotubal"junction and cervix.
Lay each horn on to filter paper dampened with M2 + BSA (Table 5) and remove any excess blood.
(ii) Insert a 25-gauge needle attached to a syringe into the lumen of the uterine horn at the ovarian end and flush 0.2–0.5 ml of M2 + BSA through into a plastic Petri dish or glass cavity block.
This procedure does not need to be done under a dissecting microscope.
(iii) Collect blastocysts into warm (37-C) M2 + BSA wash them through warmed and equilibrated drops of M16 + BSA (Table 5) and incubate in culture drops of M16 + BSA under oil at 37 C in 5% CO2 in air.
(iv) Blastocysts will expand, hatch and stick to an appropriately coated plastic Petri dish (e.g. Falcon type) but will not undergo proper attachment and trophectodermal outgrowth in M16 + BSA.
A more complex medium containing serum (e.g. DMEM + 10% FCS) is required for this subsequent development (see Section 3.5.2).
3.
MANIPULATION OF EMBRYOS AND CELLS
3.1 Staging of embryos
The cellular and molecular events of pre-implantation development occur in a precise sequence.
Very little is known about the control of the timing of these events but it is clear that there are at least two underlying clocks.
One of these is the cell cycle itself, other events are regulated in sequence and time independently of the cell cycle (2).
Analysis of timing mechanisms requires a synchronized population of cells or embryos.
As already discussed in Section 2.1.1 the population of embryos recovered from an in vivo mating will be heterogeneous, and hours post-hCG injection, or hours after the inferred time of fertilization, are inadequate as means of staging embryos.
The solution to this problem is to select one of a number of morphological criteria, observe the embryos in culture at defined intervals (e.g. every 30 min or every hour), and select those embryos that have attained a particular stage within the preceding chosen time interval.
In this way cohorts of embryos can be gathered which are synchronized to a particular developmental transition.
The following events are readily observable in intact embryos and provide a means of synchronizing them —(for timings see Table 1).
(i) Cleavage.
(Figure 1, panels 11–21).
Cell numbers are easily counted up until compaction occurs at the 8-cell stage when cell outlines become obscure.
Fertilization in vitro will improve the synchrony of cleavage to the 2-cell stage, however intrinsic heterogeneity in cleavage times will probably necessitate resynchronization to each subsequent cell division.
(ii) Compaction.
(Figure 1, panels 21,22; Figure 2, panels 1 — 4).
This process of cell flattening generally occurs at 3.5–7.5 h after the onset of the 8-cell stage (4th cell  cycle) and provides a useful transition point since, with experience, it is possible to assess complete compaction objectively.
can therefore be used to generate sub-populations of newly arisen 16-cell embryos.
(iv) Blastocoel formation.
(6th cell cycle).
(Figure 2, panels 9, 10).
The earliest manifestation of fluid transport occurs when the embryo has approximately 32 cells (Table 1) and involves the formation of a fluid-filled vacuole (or occasionally two vacuoles which enlarge and subsequently coalesce).
Selection for this feature can therefore provide populations of embryos which are just starting to form blastocysts and where the majority of cells will be in their sixth cell cycle.
3.2 Staging of isolated cells
Cleavage is asynchronous and the degree of asynchrony increases progressively as preimplantation development proceeds.
Although the morphological criteria described in Section 3.
I may be adequate for staging and synchronizing embryos for some purposes, a precise analysis of developmental mechanisms can only be undertaken on cells of known age.
The one unambiguous method of obtaining such cells it to disaggregate embryos to single cells and observe the cultures at a defined time interval as discussed in Section 3.
I and group all those cells that have divided during that time.
This procedure requires a method for removing the zona pellucida and a method for disaggregating cells.
3.2.1 Removal of the zona pellucida
It is possible to remove the zona mechanically but chemical methods are preferable when large numbers of embryos are involved.
Two reagents are in general use, one is an acidified Tyrode's solution (22) and the other a solution of pronase (23).
In both cases the composition and osmolarity are crucial to success and it is advisable to test any new batch on a few embryos before committing the entire culture to the treatment.
(i) Transfer embryos in small groups into warm (37 C) acid Tyrode's (Table 3) or pronase solution (Table 4).
The temperature (37 C) is particularly important for successful zona removal with acid Tyrode's.
(ii) Pipette embryos gently up and down in the solution and observe them under the microscope.
In the case of acid Tyrode's the process only takes a matter of seconds, the zona swells and then thins and it is advisable to remove the embryos to warm M2 + BSA (Table 5) before the zona is dissolved completely.
Over-exposure of the embryos to the low pH will result in lysis of some or all of the cells within minutes.
Early stages (up to and including early 4-cell) are more sensitive to acid Tyrode's treatment (especially early in the cell cycle) than later stages.
One-cell embryos are most viable if zonae are removed immediately after fertilization.
Zona removal with pronase takes longer (3–4 min) and the enzyme is diluted and effectively inhibited by transferring the embryos to warm M2 + BSA.
(iii) Wash the embryos in M16 + BSA (Table 5) culture medium and incubate at 37 C in 5% CO2 in air under oil.
There are two important points to note.
First removing the zona may affect surface, and possibly cytoskeletal, components (24), so the necessity of a subsequent"recovery period in vitro should always be considered.
Second, once divested of their zonae, embryos of all stages are very sticky and tend to adhere to one another as well as to most culture dishes.
Zona-free embryos are therefore cultured individually in small drops of M16 + BSA in non-adherent Petri dishes (e.g. Sterilin).
3.2.2 Disaggregation of cells In order to disaggregate embryos efficiently with minimal damage to the cells it is   necessary to use a micropipette with a flame-polished end and an internal diameter just in excess of the diameter of the cells to be disaggregated.
The micropipettes are easy to pull by hand using 1.2 mm tubing (Section 5.3.6) although an electrode puller can be used and the squaring and polishing is done using a microforge.
Pipetting aids for capillary pipettes provide suitable holders for the micropipettes which can be attached to a conventional mouth piece.
Early cleavage stages (2-cell to late 8-cell) are disaggregated simply by exposure to media deficient in Ca2 + which combats the Ca2 + — dependent cell adhesion system (2).
(i) Incubate embryos (without their zonae) for approximately 10 min in Ca2+-free M2 + 6 mg/ml BSA (Table 5) under oil at 37-C in air.
(ii) Pipette small groups of embryos (3–4) up and down through a micropipette with a bore slightly less than the diameter of the embryos.
Carry out all the manipulations with the culture dish on the heated stage (37 C) of a binocular dissecting microscope.
Set aside any single cells resulting from this manipulation and subject the remaining aggregates and other embryos to further pipetting until disaggregation is complete.
In some cases pairs of cells will be seen to be attached by a cytoplasmic bridge (the "midbody" ), which represents the remains of the previous cleavage furrow and hence indicates the original point of contact between the cells as well as the orientation of the cleavage plane (12).
(iii) Wash isolated cells through warm drops of M 16 + BSA (Tables) in non-adherent dishes (e.g. Sterilin) and culture them in small drops either singly or in groups.
In the latter ease care must be taken to ensure that the cells do not touch one another as they will tend to stick together.
(iv) If cells of known age are required, culture the isolated cells and examine them at hourly or half hourly intervals for division.
Pool pairs of cells that have divided within a chosen time interval and culture until they attain the appropriate age.
If single cells are required subject these pairs of blastomeres to a second cycle of disaggregation as previously described.
As before, the midbody provides a topographical marker for the previous cleavage furrow.
The 16-cell stage is the first stage at which two cellular phenotypes (polar and apolar) can be distinguished (discussed in Section 4.1).
By collecting the progeny of single 8-cell blastomeres in vitro it is possible to separate these two subpopulations since the pairs of 16-cell blastomeres are generally of different sizes and in most cases the larger cell is polar (presumptive trophectoderm, TE) and the smaller cell is apolar (presumptive inner cell mass, ICM)(26, and Section 4.1).
From the mid to late 16-cell stage onwards embryos become progressively more difficult to disaggregate due to the development of focal tight junctions and adherens junctions between outside cells which are not susceptible to disruption by Ca2+ depletion alone.
Methods for dissociating cells are therefore more drastic and not necessarily compatible with long-term viability.
Incubation for 15 min at 37-C in 25 mg/ml trypsin and 10 mg/ml EDTA in Ca2 + -free M2 + 6 mg/ml BSA followed by extensive pipetting using a flame-polished micropipette has been found satisfactory for late 16-cell embryos and early blastocysts (13,25).
For later blastocysts a preliminary incubation in the microfilament-disrupting drug cytochalasin D (CCD, 0.5 μg/ml at 37 C for 10 min) which causes rounding up of cells and loosening of intercellular adhesions can increase the accessibility for the trypsin/EDTA solution.
Successful disaggregation of late blastocysts is dependent upon complete removal of the CCD prior to trypsin treatment.
Disaggregation of isolated ICMs is discussed in Section 3.4.
3.3 Aggregation of embryos and isolated cells
One method of constructing chimaeric (or "allophenic" ) mice is to aggregate two or more genotypically distinct morulae together and re-implant the composite embryo into the uterus of a pseudopregnant foster mother (23, and see Chapter 6, Section 2.2).
This technique involves nudging two or more zona-free 8- to 16-cell embryos together in culture until they stick together.
Adhesion can be assisted by incubation in a lectin, phytohaemagglutinin,(PHA; 1:20 of Gibco stock solution) during the contact period.
Some experimental procedures require reaggregation of individual, pairs or groups of synchronous or asynchronous cells.
This can be achieved by taking advantage of their intrinsic "stickiness" and simply pipetting the cells close together in warm (37 C) M2 + BSA with the culture dish on a heated microscope stage.
Again the lectin PHA (Gibco stock diluted 1:20 in M2 + BSA) can be used to aid aggregation.
This has no detected effect on subsequent development and may be used to facilitate the adhesion of cells in defined orientations (12).
A 1–2 min exposure to PHA at 37 C in M2 + BSA is generally sufficient to ensure adhesion between the cells which can then be washed free of lectin, rinsed and transferred with a clean pipette to small drops of M 16 + BSA under oil at 37 C in 5% CO2 in air for aggregation.
Analysis of the morphology of the resulting cell clusters [assisted by 4, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining of nuclei, Section 3.6.2]has been used to assess the influence of cell interactions on cell fate during development (26).
3.4 Isolation of inside cells from morulae or inner cell masses from blastocysts
Many procedures used for isolating clusters of viable inside cells from either morulae (> 16 cells) or blastocysts (>32 cells) are based on the application of cytotoxic reagents to the exterior of the embryo which will lyse the outer cells but not reach the inner cells due to the barrier provided by the tight junction permeability seal.
The most commonly used procedure involves cytotoxic antibody followed by complement (immunosurgery) but ionophores have also been employed.
The immunosurgery procedure is based on the method described originally by Solter and Knowles (27, discussed in ref. 28).
(i) incubate embryos with or without their zonae, in warm (37 C) rabbit anti-mouse species antiserum (heat-inactivated at 56 C for 30 min and diluted 1: 10 with M2, Table 5) for 2–4 min (morulae and early blastocysts) or 10 min (expanded blastocysts).
(ii) Wash embryos three times through warm M2 + BSA (Table 5) then incubate them for 5–7 min in complement diluted between 1 in 5 and 1 in 10 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS).
Serum is the source of complement and the type used is important.
Rat serum is the least toxic (29) but guinea pig serum can be used.
Rabbit serum is invariably toxic.
Absorb the complement with agarose (30), store it at 70 C and only thaw it immediately prior to use.
(iii) After incubation in complement, transfer the embryos to fresh M2 + BSA and leave them for a further 20–30 min at 37 C during which time the outer cells should be seen to bleb and lyse.
(iv) Remove these outer cells by pipetting the embryos through a flame-polished micropipette with an internal diameter slightly larger than the clump of inside cells or ICM.
In order to disaggregate clusters of inside cells of ICMs it is necessary to decompact the aggregates first and this can be done by a 20-min incubation in warm Ca2+-depleted M2 + BSA or M2 + BSA containing 0.5 μg/ml CCD.
The cells can then be disaggregated  in this medium using a flame-polished micropipette with a diameter smaller than the cluster of cells (14).
An alternative method for isolating advanced ICMs is to allow blastocysts to hatch and outgrow (see Section 3.5.2) and then remove the knot of ICM cells that develops on top of the layer of trophectoderm outgrowth, using a mouth pipette.
3.5 Isolation of trophectoderm
Trophectoderm (TE) is difficult to separate from ICM without recourse to elaborate microdissection methods as described by Gardner (31).
However two other methods can be employed.
3.5.1 Isolation as vesicles or from blastocysts
Mouse ICM is much more susceptible to lethal damage by X-irradiation or anti-metabolites than TE and treatment of embryos (starting from the 2- to 8- cell stage) with a variety of these reagents has been used to generate trophectodermal vesicles devoid of any apparent ICM (discussed in ref. 28).
In addition, early cleavage stage blastomeres disaggregated and cultured individually or in small groups frequently give rise to "false blastocysts" which appear to be composed of only TE (26 and references cited therein).
The purity of TE generated by these approaches is highly questionable.
An alternative procedure yields rafts of trophectodermal epithelium from the mural region of the blastocyst, and involves forming "giant" blastocysts by aggregating together up to 10 morulae as described in Section 3.3.
When these "giant" blastocysts have expanded they are sufficiently large that a razor blade, scalpel or sharp glass needle can be used under a dissecting microscope to sever the mural TE from the other pole of the blastocyst containing ICM and polar TE (32).
If transferred to culture these rafts of epithelium may re-seal and expand as vesicles of mural TE.
3.5.2 Isolation from outgrowths
Embryos are cultured to the hatched blastocyst stage in M16 + BSA (Table 5) and then transferred to plastic Petri dishes (Falcon) or plastic coverslips in a more complex medium (e.g. DMEM) supplemented with heat-inactivated 10% FCS, penicillin (60 μg/ml) and streptomycin (50 μg/ml).
Embryos will attach to the culture dish within 24 h and outgrowths of polyploid TE will start to spread on to the substratum within the next day (Figure 2, panel 12).
Such cultures retain viability and continue to proliferate for approximately I week but changing the medium may extend this period.
The ICM develops on top of the outgrowth as a knot of cells which can be removed using a mouth pipette.
It is possible to obtain further post-implantation development by careful manipulation of the substrata and media used (33, see also Chapter 3, Section 6).
3.6 Counting of cells
Cell numbers can he assessed directly if the embryos or cell aggregates can be disaggregated easily.
Otherwise cell nuclei of embryos or aggregates can be stained and embryos disaggregated as discussed below.
3.6.1 Giemsa staining of nuclei (34)
(i) Expose whole embryos (with or without their zonae), ICMs or other clusters of cells, to 0.9% sodium citrate for periods ranging from 1 to 10 min during which time the cells should swell and loosen their contacts.
(The later the stage of intact embryos the longer they require in the sodium citrate solution.)(ii) Transfer embryos or cells to acetone-cleaned slides, fix by dropping a single drop of ethanol: acetic acid (3:1 v/v) onto them and air dry.
(iii) Millipore the Giemsa stain (5% in PBS, Table 4) immediately before use and stain the samples for 10 min before counting the nuclei.
This method is not suitable for late blastocysts — but see Section 3.6.2.
3.6.2 DAPI staining
(i) Stain nuclei with the vital fluorescent dye DAPI at 100 μg/ml in culture medium for 30 min at 37-C (26).
(ii) Disaggregate embryos (up to early blastocysts) or cell clumps in calcium-free media or 0.9% sodium citrate, air dry, fix with 70% ethanol and count the nuclei using a fluorescent microscope equipped with appropriate light source and filters.
To count the nuclei of TE and ICM in late blastocysts carry out the following procedure.
(i) Carry out immunosurgery (as described in Section 3.4) until the TE cells start to swell in the complement.
(ii) Wash the blastocysts carefully in M2 + BSA (Table 5), incubate in DAPI (100 μg/ml in M2 + BSA for 30 min, 37 C) wash again, and place the blastocysts in a small drop of M2 + BSA on an acetic acid-cleaned microscope slide.
(iii) Shell the ICM out of the TE using a flame-polished micropipette and transfer it to a drop of 0.9% sodium citrate.
(iv) Allow the TE to dry down and after 15 min partially disaggregate the ICM and allow it to dry down.
(v) Fix the cells by pipetting 70% alcohol on to them and allow them to air dry.
(vi) Count fluorescent ICM and TE nuclei as described above.
Differential counts of ICM and TE cells in intact blastocysts have also been undertaken using polynucleotide-specific fluorochromes (35).
3.6.3 Microdensitometry of Feulgen-stained"nuclei
Cell numbers can also be obtained from counts of nuclei stained by the Feulgen reaction.
In addition, DNA content of stained nuclei can be assessed on an integrating microdensitometer (e.g. Vickers M85) by comparison with cell nuclei of different ploidy derived from air-dried smears of mouse liver (3,11).
(i) Incubate embryos or cell aggregates for IS min in Ca2+- and Mg2+-free Hank's medium (Gibco) at 37-C, dry them in air on clean microscope slides, fix in ethanol:acetic acid (3:1 v/v) for 5 min, followed by ethanol:acetic acid:formaldehyde (40%) fixation (85:5:10 by vol) for 1 h, dry in air again and store them at -20-C;(ii) Prepare Schiff's basic stain for the Feulgen reaction as follows.
Add 4.0 g of Basic fuchsin to 800 ml of boiling double-distilled water, and then cool for 30 min.
Add 12 g of potassium metabisulphite in 120 ml of 1M HCl and leave the solution overnight.
Decolourize the solution by stirring with activated charcoal for 1 h, filter and then store it in a dark bottle at 4 C.
(iii) Stain sampled with Schiff's reagent.
First soak in 5 M HCl for 55 min at 26-C, then wash in double-distilled water for 5 min and then stain in freshly prepared and filtered Schiff's reagent for 2 h in the dark.
(iv) Wash three times for 10 min in freshly prepared sulphurous acid (consisting of equal volume", of 1 % potassium metabisulphite and 0.1 M HCl).
Rinse in tap water.
(v) Dehydrate in graded alcohols and finally in xylene.
(vi) Mount samples in Depex, store at 4 C, and analyse them within 2 weeks on an integrating microdensitometer (e.g. Vickers M85) by measuring light absorption at a wavelength of 560 mm.
A fixed and stained sample of mouse liver analysed simultaneously in all experiments will provide reference values for 2C and 4C amounts of DNA.
4.
THE USE OF LABELLED LIGANDS TO STUDY THE ORGANIZATION OF CELLS AND EMBRYOS
A variety of fluorescent, peroxidase-labelled, or radiolabelled, antibodies, lectins and other ligands have been applied to the mouse embryo in studies of the organization, composition and function of cells at different stages (for comprehensive reviews see 36–39).
4.1 Cell labelling and surface morphology
Lectins and antibodies have been used to obtain quantitative data on the detailed surface topography and molecular organization of embryo membranes (reviewed 40) but are more commonly applied as general membrane markers which reveal asymmetries in the distribution of surface microvilli on individual blastomeres (12).
In normal embryos this surface polarity is indicative of a profound reorganization of the embryo which develops at the 8-cell stage and is thought to  underlie the process of cell divergence (2).
Different types of information can be obtained depending upon the age of the embryos and whether they are disaggregated before or after staining.
General surface markers (e.g. lectins or anti-mouse species antibodies) applied to embryos up to the 8-cell stage will stain all blastomeres homogeneously prior to compaction and in a polarized fashion thereafter.
This is true whether or not the embryos are disaggregated prior to staining.
At the 16-cell stage, compaction of the embryos restricts access of stain to the outside cells and so, after staining of intact embryos, disaggregation and identification of labelled (outer) and unlabelled (inner) cells is a means of determining cell position and numbers in the intact embryo.
If staining is carried out after disaggregation all cells stain but two phenotypes, one polar and one non-polar, can be  distinguished.
If the two approaches are combined and intact embryos are stained with a reagent conjugated to one fluorochrome [e.g. fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)], followed by disaggregation and staining with a second reagent conjugated to a different fluorochrome [e.g. rhodamine (TMRTC)], the polar population (prospective TE) can be assigned to the external position, and the non-polar population (prospective ICM) can be assigned to the internal position (2,25).
The staining procedures outlined above are described in Section 4.1.1.
Stained cells or embryos may be examined directly, or following scanning electron microscopy (Section 4.1.2), to provide information on the inside or outside position of the cells within the embryos, their phenotypes and hence presumptive fates (2,25), as well as their numbers.
Staining also enables the recovery of inside and outside cells for subsequent developmental analysis (Sections 3.2, 3.3, 3.4).
4.1.1 Staining of embryos with antibodies or lectins
Staining can be either a one-step procedure ( "direct" — using labelled antibody or lee-tin) or a two-step procedure [ "indirect" -using two interacting reagents (generally antibodies) where the first is unlabelled and the second labelled].
Internalization and other forms of redistribution of label can be prevented by including 0.02% sodium azide in the dilutions of antisera, as well as in the washing and mounting media, or by fixing the cells in 3.7% formaldehyde in PBS (glutaraldehyde fixation makes the cells autofluorescent), followed by extensive washing.
However, cells will no longer be viable after fixation or azide treatment.
(i) Direct labelling.
(1) Incubate unfixed embryos or cells at room temperature for 15–30 min in small drops of FITC- or TMRTC-conjugated lectin or antibody.
Appropriate antibody dilutions (in M2, see Table 5) are determined by experiment.
Whole sera, IgG fractions and Fab fractions of IgG have all been used (25).
Concanavalin A (Con A) is the most frequently used lectin at concentrations of 0.5 — 1.0 mg/nil in M2 + BSA (Figure 2, panel 8).
(2) Wash embryos by repeated passage through drops of M2 + BSA (phenol red must be omitted because it fluoresces).
Cells and embryos can be viewed alive or fixed immediately after staining.
(3) The most convenient slides for mounting embryos for viewing are tissue typing slides (Baird & Tatlock, details in Section 5).
Place each slide in a container of adequate depth and immerse the slide in liquid paraffin oil.
With the slide and its container under a binocular microscope use a mouth pipette to dispense a small volume of M2 + BSA under the oil and into the centre of each well.
Add small groups of the labelled embryos to these drops.
Reduce the volume of the drops, remove the slide from the oil, drain it slightly and apply a glass coverslip.
Wipe the slide free of oil and view under a fluorescence microscope fitted with an incident source and filters appropriate for the fluorochromes used.
(ii) Indirect immunofluorescence.
For this method use an unlabelled antibody as the first layer and proceed as in (1) and (2) above.
Then incubate the embryos at room  temperature for 15–30 min in the second layer (an FITC- or TMRTC-conjugated antibody or IgG directed against the first antibody) diluted appropriately in M2.
Then follow steps (2) and (3).
4.1.2 Scanning electron microscopy
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) has been used to examine surface morphology (Figure 2, panel 7, and ref. 41) as well as the topographical distribution of membrane determinants detected immunocytochemically (42).
Surface binding ligands may be combined with a visible marker leg.
Staphylococcus aureus which binds to the Fe portion of some immunoglobulins via its component protein A (42,43) or other forms of insolubilized protein A, lectins or antibodies].
The SEM procedure is essentially similar to that used for larger specimens and only those adaptations necessary for embryos or their component cells will be dealt with here.
Samples are processed stuck down to glass coverslips and great care is taken to eliminate dust and other particles by Millipore filtration of all solutions (filter pore size = 0.22 μm) immediately before use (41).
(i) Notch glass coverslips (9 mm X 9 nun are a convenient size) to specify the side which carries the embryos.
Clean by soaking in 100% ethanol, wipe with lint-free paper and air dry for at least 1 h.
Soak the clean coverslips in a freshly prepared and Millipored solution of poly-L-lysine (PLL, Sigma Type lb, 1 mg/ml in double-distilled water) for approximately 1 h.
Immediately prior to use rinse the coverslips two or three times in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer pH 7.4 and place them in individual wells of a multi-well plastic tissue culture dish (Nunc) containing 0.1 M cacodylate buffer pH 7.4.
(ii) Fix zona-free embryos or blastomeres in 6% glutaraldehyde (Sigma) in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer pH 7.4 for 1 h at room temperature.
(iii) Transfer embryos to 1% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer pH 7.4 and mouth pipette them on to the centre of a prepared coverslip.
The multi-well dishes will fit on to the stage of a binocular dissecting microscope and if angled mouth pipettes are constructed the entire procedure can be viewed down the microscope.
The use of 1 % glutaraldehyde fixative during transfer assists firm attachment of the cells to the PLL-treated glass substrate.
Ensure that the adhesion is successful by using the pipette to pass streams of buffer over the attached cells.
Adhesion generally occurs readily and if not the quality of the PLL coating should be questioned.
Take care not to touch the cells with the end of the pipette or allow them to touch one another as they will be impossible to dislodge without damage.
(iv) Dehydrate the samples immediately through graded alcohols which are freshly Millipored before use (30 min in 20%, 40%, 60% ethanol, overnight at 4-C in 70% ethanol, then 30 min each in 80%, 90%, 95% and two exposures to dry 100% Analar ethanol).
(v) Critical point drying, gold coating and mounting for viewing then follow conventional procedures (42).
4.1.3 Freeze-fracture
This technique, used in combination with agents which bind to specific membrane components and induce identifiable lesions in membrane replicas [e.g. the sterol-binding antibiotic filipin,(32)], enables the topography of the membrane to be examined with an approximately 10-fold increase in resolution compared with SEM (32,44).
The processing of material is as conventionally described (45) apart from the fact that the small size of the embryos necessitates their being mounted in specially constructed holders (44) or embedded in a matrix [e.g. gelatin (32)].
It is not necessary to remove the zona.
4.2 Labelling of intracellular components
4.2.1 Immunocytochemistry at the light microscope level
Early mouse embryos and their component cells are most easily manipulated during fixation and immunocytological staining if stuck down to coverslips.
A method first used for lampbrush chromosomes has been subsequently adapted for visualization of cellular organelles and cytoskeletons (46) using, for example, antibodies to actin (46), tubulin (41), microtubule organizing centres (47), nuclear matrix lamins (48), clathrin and lysosomes (48).
Where it is necessary to relate intracellular organization to surface polarity, zona-free embryos or cells can be labelled with FITC — or TMRTC — Con A followed by washing [see Section 4.1.1 (i)]prior to immunocytological staining.
Embryos or cells are fixed, extracted and stained in specially constructed glass chambers consisting of a glass washer (1.5 mm thick and 25 mm external diameter) to which a glass coverslip has been attached using paraffin wax (46).
The procedure for immunocytochemistry is as follows.
(i) Coat the coverslip for 5 min at room temperature with 0.1 mg/ml Con A, or, if the cells are already stained with Con A to identify surface polarity, with a 1:20 dilution of PHA (Gibco).
(ii) Rinse the coverslip with M2 (see Tables) + 4 mg/nil polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) and fill the chamber with M2 + PVP.
(iii) Pipette the cells onto the coverslips where they should attach firmly and immediately.
(iv) Close the chambers with a second coverslip and stack them in a 50 ml polycarbonate centrifuge tube with a hole drilled through its base and a Perspex plunger inserted in the bottom third of the tube.
Up to four chambers can be inserted per tube each interleaved with a 25 mm Millipore pre-filter.
(v) Adhere the cells on to their glass coverslips by centrifuging them at 500 g for 10 min at 20-C in a HB-4 rotor of a Sorvall RC-5 centrifuge.
(vi) After centrifugation insert a rod through the hole in the base of the tube and push the plunger up gently until the chambers emerge and can be removed.
(vii) Take off the top coverslip which served as a lid.
Fix the cells with 3.7% formaldehyde in PBS for 30–45 min at 20-C, wash four times in PBS, extract with 0.25% Triton X-100 in PBS for 10 min at 20-C and finally wash twice in PBS.
This procedure provides the best preservation of cells and penetration of antibodies and induces a minimum of reorganization of intracellular proteins  during extraction of the fixed cells (46).
However the sequence of fixation and permeabilization must be tested for each determinant.
For example, when staining microtubule organizing centres, extraction prior to fixation is necessary to reduce the cytoplasmic background (47).
(viii) Remove the coverslips from their chambers and transfer them into PBS containing 0.1 % Tween-20 (PBS — Tween) before incubating them with the specific antibodies or other reagents.
(ix) Incubate extracted cells at room temperature for approximately 20 min in an appropriate dilution of the specific antibody in PBS — Tween + 3 mg/ml BSA, wash twice in PBS — Tween and stain for 20 min in the second (labelled) antibody diluted in PBS — Tween + 3 mg/ml BSA.
(x) Wash the cells again in PBS Tween, remove the coverslips from the chambers, mount in Citifluor,(City University London) which reduces fading of fluorescein label, and view on a fluorescence microscope.
Where peroxidase-labelled antibody is used as a second layer the peroxidase activity is revealed using the method of Graham and Karnovsky (49).
4.2.2 Intracellular,.
ultrastructure examined by transmission electron microscopy
The following procedures are used to prepare samples for transmission electron microscopy (TEM).
All manipulations are done under a dissecting microscope using glass cavity blocks and glass mouth pipettes (angled if necessary).
BEEM capsules (Polaron Equipment Ltd, Watford, Herts) are used for embedding with a low viscosity resin (e.g. Spurr).
(i) Fix the embryos or blastomeres for 15–30 min at room temperature in freshly prepared 3% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate (pH 7.3).
Wash twice in the cacodylate buffer.
(ii) Post-fix in 1 % OsO4 (osmium tetroxide) in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate (pH 7.3) for 30 min at room temperature.
OsO4 vapour is highly toxic and this manipulation is best undertaken by incubating embryos in small drops of 0504 under oil in plastic Petri dishes (set up in a fume cupboard).
(iii) Wash the embryos or blastomeres in double-distilled water, stain them en bloc with saturated aqueous uranyl acetate for 30 min at room temperature.
(iv) Dehydrate them through a graded alcohol series.
Embryos tend to stick to the surfaces of micropipettes and cavity blocks when 70% alcohol is reached and it may be more practical to remove and replace the alcohol rather than transfer embryos between cavity blocks.
(v) Because of its low viscosity Spurr resin has been found satisfactory as an embedding medium.
Run a test polymerization for each batch since some of the resin components are labile.
Make up Spurr resin according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Store at — 20-C for a maximum of 2 weeks and allow to reach room temperature before use.
(vi) Infiltrate embryos in 1:1, Spurr: 100% alcohol (v/v), 1–2 h at room temperature, followed by 2:1, Spurr: 100% alcohol (v/v), 1–2 h at room temperature.
Use an angled mouth pipette to localize a few embryos in a small drop of infiltration mix in the centre of the flat base of a BEEM capsule, fill up the capsule with Spurr and polymerize at 60C for 16 h.
(vii) Cut ultra-thin sections and deposit them on copper grids (grids with thin bars, e.g. Gildergrids G200 HS are preferable).
(viii) Make up staining solutions.
(a) Alcoholic uranyl acetate: a saturated solution in 50% ethanol.
Store in a dark bottle.
(b) Lead citrate: add 1.33 g of lead nitrate and 1.76 g of sodium citrate to 30 ml of CO2-free double-distilled water in a 50 ml volumetric flask.
Shake continuously for 1 min and intermittently for 30 min.
Add 8 ml of 1 M NaOH (Analar solution not pellets).
Make up to 50 ml with CO2-free double-distilled water.
(ix) Place the required number of drops (one per grid) of Millipore-filtered alcoholic uranyl acetate on to a square of pink dental wax in a plastic Petri dish.
Place one grid on to each drop, section side down.
Cover with a lid and leave for 10–15 min.
(x) Remove each grid in turn and wash off the stain with running drops of CO2-free double-distilled water.
Dry the grids on clean Velin tissue or hardened filter paper.
(xi) Centrifuge the lead citrate solution for 10 min at 5000 rpm.
Place drops of the clear supernatant on to dental wax in a Petri dish as before.
Put some NaOH pellets around the edge and place one grid on each drop, section side down.
Do not breath over the drops as CO2 will cause lead precipitation.
Stain for 5 min.
Wash off the stain with CO2-free double-distilled water and dry.
(xii) View by transmission electron microscopy.
4.3 Cell lineage markers
The ideal cell lineage marker should be cell localized, cell autonomous, stable, ubiquitous, easy to detect and developmentally neutral.
Few markers available currently fulfil all these criteria (reviewed in 50) but some have been successfully applied to the mouse (see Chapter 6).
Two cell lineage markers have been applied recently to the pre-implantation mouse embryo.
Short-term labelling has been achieved by incubating isolated blastomeres or intact embryos with FITC (0.5 mg/ml in ungassed M16, pH 7.7, containing 4 mg/ml PVP for 10 min at room temperature, followed by washing in M2 + BSA and subsequent culture in M16 + BSA (51).
Cells must be labelled in suspension otherwise they will stick to the dish and lyse.
This procedure, however, has the disadvantage common to many cell marking techniques that the cells selected for labelling need to be isolated from their neighbours and hence disaggregation and reaggregation steps are necessary.
A more ideal marker would be one which labelled an entire population within intact viable embryos without disrupting their integrity.
This criterion appears to be fulfilled by a monodisperse suspension of fluorescein-coated carboxylated latex microparticles (yellow green Fluoresbrite; 0.2 μm particle diameter)(13).
The label is readily incorporated into cleavage-stage cells by the endocytic route, is clearly identifiable in living, fixed and sectioned preparations and has no apparent effect on development.
Furthermore, these microparticles are available in various sizes and can be obtained coupled to other fluorochromes.
Isolated blastomeres can be labelled and their fate followed after reaggregation with unlabelled cells or the  reagent may be used to label the entire outside cell population of an intact embryo from the 16-cell stage onwards.
The procedures for labelling embryos with fluorescent microparticles are as follows.
(i) Incubate zona-free embryos or cells in a 1:50 dilution of a stock suspension of microparticles in M2 + BSA (Tables) for 5 — 15 min at 37-C, wash them through 2 3 drops of M2 + BSA and either analyse them immediately, or reaggregate then, with other unlabelled blastomeres (see Section 3.3) and return them to culture for subsequent analysis.
Where necessary carry out disaggregation as described in Section 3.2.2.
(ii) Intracellular labelling with fluorescein-coated latex microparticles can be preceded or followed by surface labelling using rhodamine-conjugated Con A (TMRTC — Con A, Polysciences).
Incubate embryos or cells in TMRTC — Con A at 1 mg/ml in M2 + BSA to identify outside cells in zona-free intact embryos (I min for 16-cell embryos; 5 min for blastocysts; at 37-C) or to reveal surface polarity in isolated cells (5 min, 37-C).
After incubation wash embryos or cells in 2–3 changes of M2 + BSA.
(iii) To analyse the fluorescence, fix the cells or embryos in 4% formaldehyde in PBS for 10 min, wash them in M2 + BSA and mount them in this medium in the wells of a tissue typing slide (Baird and Tatlock, see Section 4.1.1).
Use a fluorescence photomicroscope for examining specimens and take photographs on Kodak Tri-X 35 mm film.
(iv) Determine the position and developmental fate of fluorescein-latex-labelled cells within blastocysts following a cell lineage experiment by three alternative methods.
(a) Analyse whole embryos.
(b) Surface label intact embryos with TMRTC — Con A (as a marker for trophectoderm) disaggregate the blastocyst (see Section 3.2.2) fix the cells (4% formaldehyde in PBS for 10 min) and score the cells for their FITC and/or TMRTC labelling patterns.
(c) Process blastocysts for serial section analysis by TEM.
JB-4 (Polysciences), a water-soluble resin, has been found to be the optimal embedding medium.
(See ref. 13 for details of processing technique.)
5.
REAGENTS, MEDIA AND EQUIPMENT
5.1 Reagents
Use the best grade of chemicals available.
Designate a set of spatulas for dispensing tissue culture chemicals only and ensure that they are cleaned after every use.
The reagents in Table 4 have been found satisfactory in our laboratory.
5.2 Media
The media in Table 5 are used successfully in our laboratory.
M2 is a Hepes-buffered medium (pH 7.4 at 37-C) for recovering and handling embryos out of the incubator (based on the recipe in ref. 52).
M16 is the CO2-buffered medium used for culture (based on the recipe in ref. 53).
Both media have been modified as described in ref. 54 and   are made up from stock solutions given in Table 5.
Osmolarity of M2 and M 16 is in the range 285 290 mOsmol.
DMEM + 10% FCS is used as a blastocyst outgrowth medium.
5.3 Equipment
5.3.1 Glassware
A special set of glassware should be designated for media preparation, rinsed and soaked in double-distilled water immediately after use, washed in double-distilled water only and dried in a hot oven.
5.3.2 Microscopes
It is important to set a room aside for embryo manipulation and culture to minimize contamination.
An air conditioner to maintain normal room temperature is advisable.
Binocular dissecting microscopes (e.g. Model MS Wild Heerbrugg) with magnification ranging from approximately X 6 to X 50 are essential.
They should be housed in dust-free Perspex hoods and ideally fitted with heated stages and warming blocks set to 36 1C.
5.3.3 Incubators
A 37 C incubator maintaining 5% CO2 in air is necessary.
The CO2 monitor can either be integral to the incubator or an additional piece of equipment (e.g. CO2 Monitor Controller.
Gow-mac Instrument Company).
Alternatively the embryo culture dishes can  be placed in sealed flasks pre-equilibrated with a mixture of 5% CO2 in air.
In cases where frequent access to cultures is required (e.g. for serial observations) separate long-term and short-term incubators are advisable.
5.3.4 Laminar flow hood
It is advisable to prepare all media in a laminar flow hood (e.g. Slee Model HLF/H.
Supplier: South London Electrical Equipment Ltd) which should not be housed in the same room as the microscopes and incubators.
5.3.5 Dishes for manipulation and culture
Glass cavity blocks (1.25 inches square with concave depression, Hoslabs) are convenient for collecting embryos from large volumes of fluid because the embryos or cells will tend to roll to the centre of the dish.
Pre-packed, sterile Falcon (Becton Dickinson & Co) plastic Petri dishes, tubes and pipettes are used for conventional culture.
When a non-adherent surface is required Sterilin Petri dishes are employed (Plasticware supplier: Hawfell).
5.3.6 Glass pipettes
Variation in composition and thickness of the glass and pipette diameter of some types available can introduce unnecessary difficulties when flame-pulling disposable Pasteur pipettes for routine handling of intact embryos.
We find "Volac" pipettes (Fisons Scientific) to be suitable.
Precision glass capillary tubing is necessary for making micropipettes for disaggregating embryos and handling single cells (e.g. GC 100–15: Clark Electromedical Instruments).
The micropipettes are pulled and flame polished using a microforge (e.g. Microforge de Fonbrune Etablissements  Beaudouin ).
Pipetting aids (AR Horwell, Cat Nos. 7091 00 and 7091 10) make suitable adaptors for mouth pipettes.
5.3.7 Needles for flushing oviducts
30-Gauge Luer lock metal needles (Holborn Surgical Instruments Co Ltd) are used with the bevelled ends cut flat and the ends polished.
5.3.8 Tissue typing slides
(Supplier: Baird and Tatlock).
Cat No. 403/0522 Type J1.
Cover glasses 70 X 46 mm, Cat No. 403/0523.
6.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Much of the methodology described in this chapter is derived from work in Dr Martin H Johnson's laboratory, Department of Anatomy, Cambridge, during the past 10 years and I should like to express my gratitude to all members of the laboratory past and present for their contribution to it.
Special thanks are due to Ms Gin Flach for her efficient technical and organizational skills, to Dr Martin Johnson and Dr Tom Fleming for helpful criticisms and to Mrs Shelagh Eggo for typing the manuscript.
The work described has been supported by grants form MRC, CRC and EMBO.
Isolation, culture and manipulation of post-implantation mouse embryos
ROSA BEDDINGTON
1.
INTRODUCTION
It is only after the mammalian embryo has implanted in the uterus that differentiation and organization of the fetus occurs.
The divergence of tissue lineages preceding implantation segregates three precursor populations: one that will give rise to the trophoblast, another that generates extra-embryonic endoderm and a third, the epiblast (embryonic ectoderm), from which is derived the entire fetus and the extra-embryonic mesoderm (1).
In general, any experiment on the pre-implantation embryo which makes the epiblast chimaeric, even the addition of a single marked epiblast cell to the blastocyst, will result in chimaerism in each and every tissue of the fetus.
Only during or after epiblast diversification can experimental interference preferentially modify or distinguish particular fetal tissues (2).
Therefore, in order to study the development of a particular fetal constituent experiments must be conducted on the post-implantation embryo.
No method for the precise manipulation of the embryo in utero has been devised and so most experiments are carried out either in vitro or in an ectopic site in vivo, neither of which is likely to provide optimal conditions for normal differentiation and morphogenesis.
In this chapter the most common isolation, grafting and culture procedures used to study the origin and development of the early fetal primordia will be outlined.
However, particular emphasis will be placed on the more recent techniques designed to study the differentiation of cells in their normal environment in the intact embryo.
2.
THE ANATOMY OF GASTRULATION AND EARLY ORGANOGENESIS
The mouse blastocyst starts to implant in the uterus on the 5th day of gestation.
On the 6th day, due to the growth of the inner cell mass (ICM) downwards into the blastocoel and accumulation of extra-embryonic ectoderm above it, the embryo acquires a cylindrical shape with a distinct junction between the embryonic and extra-embryonic regions (Figure 1a).
Subsequently, the pro-amniotic cavity forms in the epiblast and enlarges to extend into the extra-embryonic region.
At this stage the embryonic region consists of two epithelial layers: the visceral endoderm on the outside and the epiblast inside, lining the proamniotic cavity (Figure lb).
Gastrulation commences on the 7th day with the appearance of the primitive streak (Figure 1c.).
This is located in the midline of the posterior third of the embryonic region and defines the future anteroposterior axis of the fetus.
The streak is the route through  which the epiblast invaginates to produce a third layer of loosely interconnected cells, the mesoderm.
The mesoderm spreads laterally and anteriorly between the epiblast and visceral endoderm to form a complete intermediate layer in the embryonic region.
Cells emerging from the anterior aspect of the streak have a more epithelial-like organization and are distributed along the midline of the anterior part of the cylinder.
This quasi-epithelium, first recognizable on the 8th day, is known as the head process (Figure 1d) and is the probable precursor of the notochord, pre-chordal plate and, by virtue of intercalating into the outer visceral endoderm layer, of part, although probably not all, of the gut endoderm (3).
Mesoderm from the more posterior part of the streak moves into the extra-embryonic region and, as it does so, the junctional region between the epiblast and the extra-embryonic ectoderm is pushed into folds, the amniotic folds.
These folds, the most prominent of which is the posterior amniotic fold (Figure 1C), bulge into the proamniotic cavity and eventually fuse.
Meanwhile, lacunae form within the extra-embryonic mesoderm which proceed to coalesce creating a further cavity, the exocoelom, which is lined by mesoderm and separates the extra-embryonic ectoderm from the epiblast (Figure 1d).
Thus the egg cylinder comes to be divided into three distinct chambers divided off from each other by the future amnion and chorion (Figure 1d).
Gastrulation, in the sense of continued ingression through the streak, persists up to and during the 10th day of gestation, but towards the end of the 8th day the first signs of organogenesis are apparent.
A comprehensive account of organogenesis is not appropriate here but a brief account of the formation of the major organ primordia will be given.
More detailed descriptions of the differentiation of the various organ systems can be found elsewhere (4,5).
The ectoderm anterior to the primitive streak forms the neural plate which is slightly indented along the midline.
This depression, known as the neural groove, becomes more accentuated as the neural folds form on the 9th day (Figure 1e).
Subsequently, the folds fuse, transforming the neural plate into a closed tube running the length of the embryo.
Effectively, this tube is the primordium of the central nervous system.
The surface ectoderm on either side of the neural tube is flattened into cuboidal or squamous epithelium and constitutes the precursor of the epidermis.
It is at the junction between the surface ectoderm and neurectoderm that the neural crest cells arise.
These cells migrate ventrally and are dispersed throughout much of the body where they give rise to a variety of different tissue types, such as melanocytes and elements of the peripheral sensory and autonomic nervous system.
Beneath the neural groove runs the notochord (Figure 1e) and on either side of it the paraxial mesoderm.
The paraxial mesoderm of the head region is not overtly segmented but in the trunk, and eventually the tail, there is overt metamerism in the form of somites (Figure 1e and f).
These segmental blocks of paraxial mesoderm form in an orderly craniocaudal sequence beginning on the 9th day, new somites being added to the pre-existing columns from the unsegmented plate of mesoderm just anterior to the primitive streak.
Lateral to the somites the mesoderm is divided into two layers, one associated with ectoderm and the other with endoderm, the two layers being separated by the embryonic coelom.
Anteriorly, the mesoderm beneath the headfold becomes organized into the heart   (Figure 1e) which begins to contract rhythmically towards the end of the 9th day.
Blood islands appear in the extra-embryonic mesoderm lining the visceral yolk sac and by the 10th day a complex yolk sac circulation is established, blood entering the visceral yolk sac via the omphalomesenteric artery (Figure 1e) and being returned to the heart in the omphalomesenteric vein.
At the posterior end of the primitive streak the mesoderm gives rise to the allantois (Figure 1e), which is first discernible on the 8th day as a discrete bud.
The allantois grows through the exocoelom and fuses with the chorion, thus providing a direct link between the embryo and the ectoplacental cone.
This lays the foundations for the differentiation of the chorioallantoic placenta, which eventually becomes the major nutritional and respiratory organ of the conceptus.
The exact origin and time of the delamination of gut endoderm remains unclear.
It is derived from the epiblast and probably starts to emerge early in gastrulation, the head process and other invaginated epiblast cells replacing all or part of the pre-existing visceral embryonic endoderm.
The duration of cell recruitment into this new external definitive endoderm layer is unknown.
The sheet of gut endoderm assumes a characteristic tubular structure at the anterior and posterior ends of the embryo although, unlike the neural tube, this is not due to a fusion of folds but rather to its folding back on itself such that the hindgut and foregut are present initially as blind ending tubes.
Consequently, the gut remains open to the yolk cavity longer in the trunk region than elsewhere (Figure 1e).
3.
RECOVERY AND STAGING OF EMBRYOS
3.1 Recovery
All manipulations on the early post-implantation embryo require that the embryo be dissected free of the decidua and that Reichert's membrane, which does not readily   expand in culture, be reflected or removed.
The methods used are given in Table 1 and Figure 2.
Two pairs of sharpened watchmakers' forceps are necessary for this dissection.
PBI medium (6) containing 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) instead of bovine serum albumin is suitable for storing and manipulating embryos at room temperature.
3.2 Staging of embryos
Early post-implantation development is characterized by the rapid production of new tissues and dramatic morphological changes.
Therefore, careful staging of embryos is critical to the interpretation of any experiment.
Most mammalian embryologists have been guilty in the past of using age as a measure of developmental stage; this has proved to be an inadequate and often misleading criterion.
Not only can marked variation in embryonic development be observed even within litters but, during such a dynamic phase of morphogenetic change, embryos only a few hours apart in age may be significantly different in their developmental state.
Therefore, it is recommended that embryos be classified according to distinctive morphological features and certain physical dimensions to provide a more accurate and sensitive means of standardizing experiments.
Table 2 provides a possible scheme for staging living embryos, although the criteria used may have to be refined or modified according to the nature of the experiment.
4.
ISOLATION OF DEFINED TISSUES OR REGIONS
4.1 Microsurgical dissection of embryos
Either siliconized glass needles (Section 9.3) held in Leitz instrument holders or sharpened tungsten needles may be used for dissection.
These instruments are used to make straight cuts across the embryo in order to subdivide it into particular regions or fragments.
Bacteriological plastic Petri dishes (e.g. from Sterilin) are preferable to glass because the embryos are less inclined to skid about.
The isolation of the posterior part of the primitive streak of 8th day embryos is provided as an example in Table 3 and Figure 3A but the basic technique can be applied to the isolation of any part of the   embryo at any stage.
The general principle is to divide the embryo into progressively smaller pieces while retaining a means of identifying the region one intends to isolate.
4.2 Enzymatic separation of tissues
Proteolytic enzymes, in conjunction with microsurgical dissection, may be used to separate the germ layers.
The most efficient procedure, devised by Levak-Svajger et al.(8), utilizes a mixture of trypsin and pancreatin and achieves not only clean separation but also prevents the tissues becoming unduly sticky and difficult to manipulate (9).
An example of enzymatic separation is given in Table 4 and Figure 3B and 8th day epiblast isolated by this procedure is shown in Figure 4.
In practice, this method can be used for the isolation of a variety of tissues, even from quite advanced embryos, if the incubation period is varied according to the job in hand.
For example the visceral yolk sac can be separated into its constituent endoderm and mesoderm components following a 3 h incubation at 4 C (10).
5.
CULTURE AND ECTOPIC TRANSFER OF ISOLATED TISSUES AND FRACTIONS
5.1 Culture
The differentiation or further development of particular fractions of the embryo can be studied in culture.
A variety of media and substrata have been used but these will not be reviewed here because most experiments involve straightforward tissue or organ culture techniques which are well described elsewhere (e.g. ref. 11).
In general, the type of culture conditions used depends on what sort of information is required.
Both   standard tissue culture and organ culture techniques tend to disturb the normal relationships of the tissue layers and, therefore, are applicable only where disruption to morphogenesis is irrelevant.
Such disruption may be useful in the isolation of particular cell types from an explant of heterogeneous or multipotent tissue.
For example, neural crest cells can be isolated by explanting 9th day isolated neural tube into a standard tissue culture dish (Falcon) containing Eagle's minimal essential medium + 15% FCS + 2–4% chick embryo extract (12).
After a few days a population of adherent migratory cells is found surrounding the initial explant, which by various criteria, including contribution to melanocytes in vivo(13), appear to be a relatively pure population of neural crest cells.
Where it is important to retain some degree of normal morphogenesis, fractions should be grown in suspension culture.
Often a bacteriological quality surface is not sufficient to prevent adhesion and spreading.
Indeed, isolated tissues will sometimes spread out even on the meniscus of hanging drops of media.
Therefore, it is advisable to coat the surface of the dish with a 1% solution of agar made up in the synthetic medium of choice for subsequent culture (14).
For example, specific fractions of the 8th day embryo, left attached to the extra-embryonic region, have been grown in agar-coated dishes containing Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) + 50% rat serum (Section 6.1).
Under these conditions the fractions remain in suspension and undergo quite extensive morphogenesis.
5.2 Ectopic transfer
A variety of isolated fractions or tissues from post-implantation mouse embryos will continue to grow and differentiate if placed in a well vascularized site in an immunologically compatible adult host (2).
Xenogeneic sites such as the chick chorioallantoic membrane have been used but in general development is somewhat less predictable than when syngeneic mice serve as hosts.
Despite the abnormal morphogenesis observed in such grafts, the range of differentiated tissues formed in such an "experimental teratoma" can be used to provide an estimate of the developmental potential of the transferred tissue.
It should be noted that if trophectoderm or extra-embryonic ectoderm   are included in the graft there is a likelihood that the haemorrhagic response evoked by these tissues will obscure other differentiation (15).
Of particular interest in the mouse is the observation that up to the 8th day of gestation the isolated embryonic region will give rise to transplantable tumours when placed beneath the testis or kidney capsule (16,17).
These tumours are characterized by the presence of embryonal carcinoma cells, which are poorly differentiated cells similar in morphological and other aspects to epiblast and primordial germ cells.
The procedure for ectopic transfer beneath the testis capsule is given in Table 5.
6.
CULTURE OF WHOLE EMBRYOS
In principle, a satisfactory means of culturing post-implantation embryos affords an opportunity for the experimental study of embryonic cells in their normal environment.
Therefore, it is highly desirable that there should be reliable and efficient culture systems to support the normal development of embryos over relatively long periods.
Unfortunately, the mouse embryo has proved less tolerant to explantation in vitro, during gastrulation and organogenesis, than has the rat (18,19).
Regimes which support apparently normal growth and development of rat embryos for several days (20) are much less successful when mouse embryos are used.
For example, unlike the rat, the development of pre-primitive streak stage mouse embryos is extremely unpredictable in vitro and although development is much improved if embryos are explanted after the primitive streak has formed it seems to be a general finding that normal growth and development  cannot be sustained much beyond 24 or 36 h in culture.
Nonetheless, during a phase of such rapid change, even 24 h is sufficient to observe extensive differentiation and morphogenesis and so despite its present inadequacies whole mouse embryo culture remains an invaluable tool for the study of post-implantation development.
The procedures described below for the culture of post-implantation embryos are derived entirely, albeit with some modifications, from those designed for rat embryos (18).
Undoubtedly, there is still much room for improvement and, therefore, the protocols detailed below should be seen more as prototypes rather than definitive conditions.
6.1 Media
Embryos explanted on the 7th, 8th or 9th day of gestation can be grown in rat serum diluted 1:1 with DMEM (Flow Laboratories).
For older embryos, 100% serum is advisable.
The method of preparation of rat serum is given in Table 6.
It is particularly important that serum should be obtained from blood in which the fibrin clot has formed in plasma rather than whole blood.
If whole blood is allowed to clot before separation of the serum, early post-implantation rat embryos suffer a higher incidence of abnormalities and reduced growth (21).
Neither the sex nor the strain of donor rats appears to be important (18).
The quantity of media required will depend upon the stage and number of embryos explanted and the duration of culture.
No systematic analysis has been conducted with mouse embryos but, as a rough guide, 2.5 ml of medium will support the growth and development for 24 h of four 8th day embryos, three 9th day embryos or two 10th day embryos.
It is convenient to pre-equilibrate the medium for several hours, or overnight, in a humidified, gassed incubator (5% CO2 in air) at 37 C. This will remove most of the remaining ether from the serum (see Table 6) and reduce the amount of    time spent gassing the medium by hand.
Table 7 provides the protocol for the preparation of media.
6.2 Roller system
With rat embryos, rotation of culture vessels, which ensures continuous exposure of all the medium to the gas phase, and, therefore, a constant oxygen tension, produces normal development over longer periods than does static culture (18).
Early post-implantation mouse embryos will develop in static culture if explanted at the primitive streak stages but normal development is sustained for only 24 h or less (22).
Older   embryos and more extended cultures benefit from a rotating system and, judging from the experience with rat embryos, the same is probably true for primitive streak stage embryos, although no direct comparison between static and rotating culture systems has been undertaken at this stage in the mouse.
Rotation is achieved by either placing bottles or tubes on parallel rollers or by attaching the vessels to a rotating disc.
To ensure a sufficient depth of culture medium to fully immerse the embryos, it may be necessary to mount either the tubes or the rollers at a slight angle so that the medium stays in the bottom of the culture vessel.
The speed of rotation should be of the order of 30 — 60 r.p.m.
Roller systems mounted in a small 37 C incubator are available commercially from B.T.C. Engineering, Cambridge, UK.
Alternatively, it is quite straightforward to construct one's own roller system which can be fitted into a standard incubator.
The drive motor should be fitted outside the incubator to prevent any local heating effect.
Figure 5 illustrates the basic design of such a system.
6.3 Gas requirements
Progressively older embryos require a higher oxygen tension in the medium and, therefore, different gas mixtures are used for different stages of embryo.
Experiments with rat embryos suggest that this increased demand for oxygen is due both to a change in metabolism, from a predominantly glycolytic source of energy to utilization of the Kreb's cycle and electron transport system, and to a necessary compensation for the absence of a functional chorioallantoic placenta which serves in vivo as an important organ of respiratory exchange (18).
The appropriate percentage of oxygen in the gas phase at different developmental stages is shown in Figure 6.
At all stages the mixture must contain 5% CO2, the final volume being made up with N2.
At stages where there is some overlap in requirements for different mixtures it is better to use the higher oxygen mixture if cultures are to continue beyond 24 h.
6.4 Assessment of development
Obviously, the validity of any experiment involving cultured embryos depends upon the normality of the differentiation, morphogenesis and growth of embryos developed in vitro.
Therefore, it is important to select suitably stringent criteria for evaluating their development, Table 8 lists certain useful parameters which can be used.
It is by no means an exhaustive list.
Studies on particular aspects of gastrulation or organogenesis will require their own set of parameters according to the specific system or process being studied.
Wherever possible such parameters should be compared with those of embryos of the same age recovered in vivo.
Furthermore, unoperated controls should be included in every experiment as a further standard with which to compare experimental embryos and as a routine screen of the culture system.
7.
INTRODUCTION OF CELLS OR LABEL INTO EMBRYOS IN VITRO The injection of a suitable label into embryonic cavities can be used to mark superficial cells lining the cavity and to follow their ingression.
This is a valuable technique for the study of the fate of epiblast cells invaginating through the primitive streak or for the migration of neural crest cells (24).
Injection of other substances, such as specific enzymes or enzyme inhibitors, may also be useful in assessing the importance of particular molecules in various morphogenetic or differentiation events.
Injection of labelled cells into the embryo, either into isotopic or heterotopic sites, allows one to follow the development of specific tissues or isolated regions of the embryos (25,26).
The general strategy for producing "in vitro chimaeras" is shown in Figure 7.
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to describe all the manipulations possible on post-implantation embryos.
The simplest two-instrument cell injection technique for both primitive streak stage and for early somite stage embryos will be described.
More  complicated manipulations may require the introduction of extra instruments, such as straight or recurved solid needles, a description of which can be found elsewhere (27).
Alternatively, instruments incorporating electrodes may be required for the iontophoretic injection of tracers, such as horseradish peroxidase (HRP), into individual cells in situ.
Again, specific details of this technique are provided elsewhere (28,29).
In practice, the best combination of instruments for a particular procedure is largely a matter of trial and error but once a simple technique, such as the two-instrument injection method, has been mastered the principles of making and setting up extra instruments will be self-evident.
7.1 Equipment
Controlled injections of either solutions, cells or solid tissue require a micromanipulator assembly (Leitz, Wetzlar, FRG).
The essential components of this assembly are shown in Figure 8.
Primitive streak stage or younger embryos can be manipulated in hanging drops of media, suspended from a siliconized coverslip, mounted on a Puliv manipulation chamber (Leitz) filled with paraffin oil (for further details, see Chapter 12, Section 2.3.1).
In this case a fixed-stage microscope with image-erected optics and long distance working objectives is most appropriate (e.g. Microtec M2, MicroInstruments, Oxford).
Older embryos are best manipulated in a drop of medium on the bottom of a liquid paraffin-filled bacteriological Petri dish or Petri dish lid.
Here a standard dissecting microscope is more suitable.
Primitive streak stage embryos can also be manipulated using a dissecting microscope but the lower resolution makes such manipulations less precise.
The most critical ingredient for successful micromanipulation is good instruments (see Section 9), which are correctly aligned for use.
7.1.1 Setting up the instruments
The most important aspects of setting up instruments are:(i) there should be no air bubbles in the columns of paraffin oil;(ii) the instruments should be absolutely straight, bisecting the microscope field horizontally, and lying exactly parallel to each other.
Procedures are given in Table 9 (see also Chapter 12, Section 3.2).
Where a dissecting microscope is used and injections are conducted in a Petri dish, it is important that the tips of the instruments are inclined at a slight angle towards the bottom of the dish so that the shoulder left after pulling the capillary does not prevent the mouth of the pipette reaching the bottom of the dish (see Section 9).
This is achieved by introducing two bends into the instruments (Figure 11D, b) and by tilting the instrument head and manipulator as shown in Figure 8.
For manipulations in hanging drops it is essential that the two instruments should run parallel to the microscope stage.
7.2 Preparation of label or cells for injection
7.2.1 Label
Recently, it has been shown that the injection of wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) coupled   to labels such as colloidal gold or HRP produces effective labelling of cells lining the amniotic cavity (24), It is likely that other high molecular weight molecules which will bind to epiblast or ectoderm cells, such as other lectins or perhaps antibodies (see Chapter 2, Section 4), may prove suitable labels for selectively marking these cells or cells lining other cavities in the embryo.
If the object is to label only cells lining a cavity it is crucial to avoid increasing the hydrostatic pressure of the cavity to such an extent that label is forced into internal tissues.
Therefore, always prepare a concentrated solution of the label and inject a minimum quantity.
For example, approximately 2 x 10 -3 u1 of a 1 mg/ml (w/v) solution of WGA-HRP is sufficient to label all the epiblast cells in a late primitive streak stage embryo, the label still being detectable  after culture for 24 h.
Having prepared the solution of label, place a drop of it in the manipulation chamber or dish, sufficiently far away from the drop of medium in which the injections will be carried out, to prevent the two coalescing when the injection pipette is passed from one to the other.
7.2.2 Cells
In principle, single cell genetic markers could be used to distinguish injected donor cells from surrounding host tissue.
However, at present, apart from interspecific markers, no ubiquitous genetic marker exists which can be used to distinguish individual cells in the early embryonic tissues of the post-implantation conceptus.
The most satisfactory extrinsic marker is [3H]thymidine which, due to the rapid cell cycle of early post-implantation embryonic cells, is quickly taken up by the vast majority of cells and appears not to be deleterious to development (25).
Labelling of cells with [3H]thymidine is described in Table 10, and Figure 9 shows representative autoradiograms of uptake and labelled controls together with two chimaeras.
7.3 Injection procedure
Essentially the injection procedure is the same for both solutions and cells.
Therefore, only the injection of cells is described here (Table 11 and Figure 10).
An important point to remember when injecting solutions is never to put the holding pipette into the drop of label.
Each manipulation drop should contain only one embryo and a fresh drop should be used for each injection to minimize any possible contamination due to label diffusing out of the injection pipette.
Furthermore, injections into the mesoderm or ectoderm require going through the endoderm layer.
While this generally does not matter when cells are injected, solutions may leak into tissues other than that intended for labelling.
This problem may be avoided by careful choice of the injection route, for example, by injecting into the amniotic cavity via the extra-embryonic region.
8.
INTRODUCTION OF CELLS OR LABEL INTO EMBRYOS IN VIVO Over the last 10 years several successful attempts have been made to introduce cells or virus into the embryo in utero (30 — 32).
Obviously, this has the advantage that host embryos can be recovered at any subsequent stage and that adult chimaeras can be obtained.
Perhaps the most dramatic example of initiating chimaerism in vivo is the recent report of viable mice showing unequivocal melanocyte chimaerism produced by injecting neural crest cells, from a pigmented donor, into albino embryos in utero (13).
The disadvantages of in vivo injections are that precisely localized injections are impossible and that there may be only a restricted number of cell types which can integrate into the early post-implantation embryo following injection into the visceral yolk sac or amniotic cavity.
Furthermore, chimaeras have not been obtained from embryos injected before the middle of the 9th day of gestation, presumably because younger embryos are physically too small to be successfully penetrated, or to tolerate penetration.
Before attempting to produce chimaeras it is advisable to practice the injection procedures, given in Table 12, using readily identified solutions or suspensions, such as pontamine sky blue or India ink, or cells labelled with a fluorescein dye, to establish that the injection pipette is consistently reaching the target area.
It is possible to inject "free-hand" but, particularly for younger embryos, holding the injection pipette in a Singer manipulator produces a more reliable and steadier motion.
9.
PREPARATION OF MICROSURGICAL GLASS INSTRUMENTS
9.1 Glass
All the instruments are made from glass capillary tubing.
Injection and holding pipettes are produced from "thin-walled" tubing (o.d. 1.0 mm; i.d.
0.8 mm) which can be obtained from Drummond Scientific Company, Pennsylvania.
This is available either in soda glass or Pyrex, both of which produce suitable instruments although it is easier to clean the Pyrex glass.
Solid microneedles are made from "thick-walled" tubing (o.d. 1.0 mm; id.
0.5 mm) supplied by Leitz.
All the capillary tubing should be pre-cleaned: soak the glass in chromic acid for 24 hand rinse very thoroughly with repeated washings in distilled water.
Dry the tubing in a hot oven and store in a dust-free container.
9.2 Equipment
All instruments are made by first pulling gradually tapered needles which are subsequently modified to produce the requisite implement.
Therefore, the two basic requirements arc an electrode puller and a microforge.
Electrode pullers may be either electromagnetically or gravity-operated and are commercially available from a number of suppliers, Minor modification may be necessary in order to fit tubing of 1.0 mm diameter because most pullers are designed to accommodate the slightly larger, standard microelectrode capillary tubing.
A suitable microforge is that designed by de Fonbrune and available from Beaudouin, Paris.
A V-shaped filament of platinum wire (diameter 0.3 mm) with a small globule of glass fused to its apex should be fitted to the filament holder.
The microscope should be fitted with a calibrated ocular micrometer and should give a magnification of approximately x100.
9.3 Instruments
The most comprehensive description of the different methods for making various glass  microinstruments is provided by de Fonbrune himself (33).
Several basic procedures are included in the instruction manual supplied with the de Fonbrune microforge.
The procedures used in this laboratory for making solid dissecting needles and holding pipettes are given in Table 13 and those for in vivo injection pipettes in Table 14.
Figure 11 illustrates these procedures.
(The reader is also referred to Chapter 12, Section 2.4).
Needles can be produced by simply pulling Leitz capillary on an electrode puller but such hollow needles can cause damage to tissue if they break because of the ensuing capillary action, Solid needles are preferable both for this reason and also because they have greater mechanical strength.
Injection pipettes are made in exactly the same way as holding pipettes except that they are broken off at a smaller internal diameter.
The final diameter of the injection pipette will depend on what is to be injected (ranging from 1 μm for intracellular injection to 60 μm for large pieces of tissue).
If relatively large pieces of tissue are to be transferred, requiring an internal diameter greater than about 35 μm, it is useful to have a bevelled end to the pipette.
While bevelling machines are available commercially satisfactory instruments can be prepared by breaking the capillary tip against a cold filament.
If the pipette is repeatedly driven head-on into the globule of cold glass a break can be produced at approximately the correct internal diameter.
Usually these breaks are not perpendicular but at an angle, and so long as the end is carefully flame-polished, minor irregularities in the line of the break do not matter.
Straight holding and in vitro injection pipettes are appropriate for manipulations carried out in a manipulation chamber.
For manipulations on 9th day or older embryos, which have to be done in a Petri dish it is necessary to introduce two bends over a microburner, similar to those described for solid needles (Table 13), although the exact angle of the bends will depend on how the micromanipulator is set up (Figure 8).
As noted earlier, it is important that the tips of the holding and injection pipettes are inclined downwards at a very slight angle (Figure 11D, b) otherwise the shoulder of the pulled glass may prevent the pipettes making contact with the embryo or donor tissue.
There arc two basic requirements for an in vivo injection pipette.
The first is that the instrument should penetrate the tissue easily and the second is that the mouth of the pipette should not become obstructed by adherent tissue during penetration.
To meet these requirements de Fonbrune recommends that pipettes with a solid pointed end should   be used, the mouth of the pipette being located laterally just behind the tip (Figure 1 1B and C).
Two methods for achieving this are given in Table 14.
Method 1 is suitable for small diameter pipettes whereas method 2 is for larger ones.
If the injection pipette is renewed between operations, solutions can be injected using the simpler in vitro injection pipette.
10.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Implantation of the mouse embryo presents a serious obstacle to the analysis of tissue diversification during gastrulation and early organogenesis.
However, recently, new techniques have been devised for studying the behaviour of embryonic cells in their normal environment in the conceptus during these stages of development.
Some of these techniques have been described in this chapter.
In many respects they may appear somewhat crude and certainly there is much room for improvement, particularly in the areas of whole embryo culture and precise manipulations of the embryo, both in vitro and in vivo.
Nevertheless, over the past 10 years or so, the predominantly histological and morphological descriptions of early post-implantation embryogenesis have been augmented by valuable information relating to the more dynamic aspects of development, such as the normal fate and developmental potency of different tissues or regions of the embryo.
Such information, derived from experimental perturbation  of the embryo,"nay lead eventually to a clearer understanding of the processes governing the initial organization and differentiation of the fetus.
11.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank Professor R.L.Gardner, Dr D.L.Cockroft and Dr P.P.L.Tam for their discussion of the manuscript.
The author is a Lister Institute for Preventive Medicine Research Fellow.
Meiotic analysis in germ cells of man and the mouse
ANN C.
CHANDLEY
1.
INTRODUCTION
Mammalian meiotic chromosome preparation has progressed considerably since the early days when a good squash preparation was the best that could be achieved.
The vastly superior and more rapid method for metaphase chromosome preparation, of air-drying of germ cells following a short hypotonic pre-treatment, has long since  superseded squashing.
In addition, a new and powerful tool in the form of "spreading" for meiotic prophase analysis, has been introduced over recent years.The aim of this chapter will be to describe in detail the currently available techniques for air-drying and spreading of oocytes and spermatocytes in man and the mouse.
2.
PREPARATION OF MALE MEIOTIC CHROMOSOMES BY AIR-DRYING
While gonadal material can easily be obtained from mice, testicular samples for the study of human meiosis are not so easy to come by.
Nevertheless, they should be possible to obtain from elderly patients undergoing orchidectomy in the course of treatment for prostatic cancer, or from young men undergoing infertility investigations.
Meiosis begins at puberty in the male, and is an integral part of spermatogenesis, a process which begins with a series of mitotic divisions in the spermatogonia.
Following the pre-meiotic 5-phase interval, the cells proceed as spermatocytes through a long meiotic prophase and then through the two cell divisions leading to the production of haploid gametes.
When air-dried suspensions of cells from the testis of a sexually mature male with normal fertility are prepared, three types of dividing cells are distinguishable on the slides, spermatogonial metaphases, and first and second meiotic metaphases.
If an infertility problem is diagnosed, then spermatogenesis may well be depressed or arrested, and in these cases, the later germ cell stages will be absent or deficient on the slides.
Metaphase 1 (M1) is the stage of meiosis used in routine analysis for the establishment of bivalent number, chiasma frequency or position, and for the detection of a chromosomal anomaly such as a reciprocal translocation which can be recognized as a multivalent configuration in the complement.
At Mt in man, the X and Y pair in an end-to-end fashion, by the two short arms (p), and in the mouse, by the two long arms (q).
In a small proportion of cells in both species, the sex chromosomes are seen as univalents at Mt, and such cells may occur with much higher frequencies in sterile cases.
Cells in the second meiotic division (MII) are often difficult to analyse on account of the twisting and overlapping of chromatid arms, but when well spread, they can, and have, been used to assess aneuploidies arising from a segregational error at the first meiotic division (1,2).
The air-drying method in regular use for the preparation of meiotic divisions in man and the mouse is that of Evans et al.(3).
The technique as described originally is applied to the mouse testis below (Section 2.1), and modified in our laboratory for use with human testicular material (Section 2.2).
2.1 Air-drying method for use in the mouse
(i) Remove the testis from the tunica albuginea and place in isotonic sodium citrate solution (2.2% w/v) at room temperature.
(ii) Transfer the testis to fresh 2.2% sodium citrate solution contained in a small glass Petri dish and gently pull out the tubules.
Hold the mass of tubules with fine.
straight forceps and thoroughly tease out their contents with fine, curved forceps.
When the tubules appear "flat" and opaque allow them to settle, and carefully transfer the supernatant fluid into a 15 ml centrifuge tube.
(iii) Centrifuge the cell suspension obtained at 50 g for 5 min.
This generally leaves the majority of sperm in suspension and sediments the larger cells including the spermatocytes.
Discard the supernatant fluid and resuspend the sedimented cells in approximately 3 ml of 1% sodium citrate solution.
(iv) Leave the cells in hypotonic solution for 12 min at room temperature.
Centrifuge at 50 g for 5 min with slow acceleration.
(v) Remove as much of the supernatant fluid as possible.
Resuspend the cells in the remainder by flicking the tube so that a thin film of suspension adheres to the wall of the tube.
Add about 0.25 ml of fixative (3:1 methanol glacial acetic acid) rapidly to the suspended cells.
Thoroughly mix using a Pasteur pipette.
Add more fixative down the side of the tube, maintaining the mixing process, until the tube is about one-third full.
After 5 min, sediment the cells again by centrifuging and resuspend in fresh fixative.
Repeat the change of fixative after a further 10 min, controlling the volume of the final suspension until it appears slightly cloudy with cells.
(vi) Make a trial preparation by dropping one drop of suspension onto a grease-free (acid/alcohol washed) slide at room temperature.
If the slide is thoroughly clean and the fixation satisfactory, the droplet should expand evenly and, by gently blowing on the slide, the final evaporation will be hastened.
Examine by phase contrast.
11 the cell suspension is too thin, centrifuge again and add a smaller volume of fresh fixative.
If too thick, add more fixative.
2.2 Modification of the technique for use in man
(i) Collect testicular biopsy in 1% hypotonic sodium citrate solution.
(ii) After about 30 min chop the tubules very finely with scissors in a glass Petri dish tilted slightly, allowing large pieces of tubule to settle to the bottom.
(iii) Draw off the cell suspension with a pipette and spin down for 8 min at 450 g (it is our experience that thinner suspensions make better fixed preparations).
(iv) Discard most of the supernatant, leaving behind just enough citrate covering the  cells to flick the cells into a suspension by gently tapping the sides of the tube.
(v) Add fixative (3:1 methanol glacial acetic acid) slowly down the sides of the tube until the volume of cell suspension is about trebled.
Then pipette.
firmly but gently, breaking up any clumps of cells which may be formed.
Add more fixative to a volume of about 5 nil.
Spin down for 8 min at 450 g.
(vi) Discard the supernatant.
Add about 5 ml of fixative and allow the suspension to stand at room temperature for about 1 h.
(vii) Spin down for 8 min at 450 g.
(viii) Add about 1 ml of fixative (freshly prepared) until a slightly cloudy suspension is obtained.
(ix) Allow clumps of cells to settle to the bottom and then make a trial preparation by allowing one drop to evaporate onto a microscope slide.
Examine under the phase microscope and if it is too thin, spin down again and remove some of the fixative.
Resuspend.
2.3 Conventional staining
A recommended conventional stain is freshly prepared Giemsa (Gurrs Giemsa "R 66" 1 nil to 40 ml of buffer pH 6.8 made with Gurr's buffer tablets).
Stain for 5 min in a Coplin jar.
Alternatively.
in our laboratory we have made good use of carbol fuchsin stain (4).
When freshly prepared, a period of 30 min or more may be required to stain the slides, but with maturity, this stain "ripens" and staining times can be progressively shortened.
Carbol fuchsin is especially useful for autoradiography as it will not interfere with emulsion and will not wash out in developer.
Cells can therefore be stained prior to filming, for example in in situ hybridization experiments.
Cells in spermatogonial mitosis, MI, and MII, from a human testicular biopsy prepared by air-drying and stained with carbon fuchsin, are shown in Figure 1a — c.
At MI, the XY bivalent is readily recognizable by its chain-like appearance.
Autosomal bivalents can be arranged in order of size, but unambiguous identification of individual bivalents is not possible.
At MII, the No. 9 chromosome can sometimes be identified by the stretched region on the long arm corresponding to the secondary constriction.
An MII cell from the male mouse is shown in Figure Id.
2.4 C-banding
For further and more accurate identification of meiotic bivalents, or in the interpretation of abnormal configurations, C-banding will be found helpful.
In the mouse, a C-band is located adjacent to the centromere in all but the Y chromosome (see also Chapter  5, Section 5.2.
Figure 2a shows a C-banded MI from the mouse translocation T (14; 15) 6 Ca.
The C-band heterochromatin on the X and all autosomes is prominent.
In this particular male-sterile strain, associations between the X centromere and translocation quadrivalent arc common (5).
The Y does not display a prominent C-band.
A C-banded MII mouse spermatocyte is shown in Figure 2b.
Figure 2c shows a human M1 C-banded cell from a t (9; 22) reciprocal translocation heterozygote.
Bivalents 1, 16 and the Y are readily identifiable and the large C-bands of chromosome No. 9 can be seen in the quadrivalents (Q).
The method used to produce C-bands at meiosis is that of Chandley and Fletcher (6) modified from Sumner (7).
(An alternative procedure for C-banding of mitotic chromosomes is described in Chapter 5, Section 5.2.)
(i) Place the slides in 0.2 M HCl at room temperature for 1 h. (ii) Rinse with de-ionized water.
(iii) Place the slides in 5% barium hydroxide at 50-C for 30 sec (human), 4% barium hydroxide at 37-C for 30 see (mouse).
(iv) Rinse with de-ionized water.
(v) Place slides in 2 x standard saline citrate (SSC) at 60-C for 1 h. (vi) Rinse with de-ionized water.
(vii) Stain in Giemsa for 45 min to 1 h (see Section 2.3).
(viii) Rinse with de-ionized water, leave for a few minutes to dry thoroughly, soak in xylene and mount.
2.5 Q-banding
Fluorescence staining has proved of little value in meiotic analysis of the mouse, but in man quinacrine staining originally revealed that it was the non-fluorescent short arm of the Y chromosome which paired with the X at metaphase I of meiosis (8).
The more recent use of the AT-specific peptide antibiotic distamycin A, in combination with the AT-specific fluorescent dye 4 ", 6" -diamidino-2-phenylindole, DAPI (9), on human meiotic bivalents has shown, like C-banding, that chromosome regions containing constitutive heterochromatin are highlighted.
Bright fluorescence is found on pairs No. 1,9, 16 and the Y chromosome as well as, occasionally, bivalent No. 15 (Figure 3).
The technique is as follows.
(i) Flood the slide with distamycin A (Sigma) solution (0.1–0.2 mg/ml in McIlvaine's citric acid-Na2HPO4 buffer, pH 7.0), enough to float a coverslip.
Incubate at room temperature for 15 min in the dark in a wet chamber.
(ii) Wash the coverslip off using a wash bottle containing de-ionized water.
(iii) Apply one large drop of DAPI (Sigma) solution (0.2–0.4 g/ml in McIlvaine's buffer pH 7.0) and lower a fresh coverslip onto the drop.
Return the slide to the damp chamber in the dark for 30 min.
(iv) Wash off again using de-ionized water.
(v) Mount the slide in two drops of McIlvaine's buffer.
(vi) Blot gently with filter paper until no more buffer comes out.
(vii) Seal around the coverslip with rubber solution (e.g. Holdtite).
Distamycin A tends to lack stability in aqueous solution and it is not recommended to store it in solution.
Stained preparations may fade rapidly when first examined but usually stabilize after a day or so stored in the dark at 4-C.
2.6 Pachytene mapping
Special air-drying techniques using extended room temperature hypotonic treatments, or shorter hypotonic treatments at higher temperatures, have been devised for the production of extended pachytene chromosomes which can be used for mapping of individual bivalents (10–13).
At late pachytene, each bivalent exhibits a linear sequence of compacted regions of chromatin or "chromomeres" which vary in number, size and sequence for each chromosome in the complement.
A striking correspondence between chromomeres and mitotic G-bands has been observed, and complete pachytene karyotypes in man (12) and the mouse (13) have been produced.
C-banding can aid in the localization of"centromere positions (Figures 4a and b).
The technique used in the preparation of these human pachytene cells is that of Luciani et al.(12).
(i) Immerse testicular fragments in 10 ml of 0.88% KC1 and keep at room temperature for 8 — 10 h.
(ii) Transfer to fixative (3:1 methanol:glacial acetic acid) and leave overnight at room temperature.
(iii) The next day, shred the fragments in the fixative.
(iv) Pipette the cell suspension into a conical vial and centrifuge at 150 for 7 min.
(v) Resuspend the pellet in 5 m1 of 45% glacial acetic acid, then immediately centrifuge at 150 g for 5 min.
(vi) Make preparations by dropping suspension from a Pasteur pipette on clean pre-cooled slides and gently dry over a low gas flame.
(vii) Stain with phosphate-buffered Giemsa solution (pH 6.8)(see Section 2.3).
(viii) To visualize centromeres, remove the Giemsa using methanol, and place the slides in 1 M HCl for 5 min at room temperature.
Wash in water and treat for 3 min in 5% barium hydroxide solution at 58 C. After washing, place the slides for 20 min in 2 x SSC at 58 C and adjust the pH to 7.0.
Rinse the slides again and stain with Giemsa.
The same cells photographed for chromomere patterns at the end of step (vii) are re-photographed after step (viii).
An alternative method for preparing pachytene karyotypes using a 1 h hypotonic KC1 treatment at 37 — 38 C, has been described for man by Hungerford (10) and for the mouse by Fang and Jagiello (13).
Pachytene preparations made in this way allow the visualization of "parameres" on chromosome No. 9 in man (10,14, 15) when Giemsa staining is used.
These are highly refractile bodies seen only at the pachytene stage, and which correspond to the No. 9 C-band region seen at metaphase.
2.7 The use of air-dried male meiotic preparations in molecular analyses
Extended pachytene chromosomes prepared by the techniques described in Section 2.6 have been used for the localization of genes by in situ hybridization techniques (16,17).
Th resolution with pachytene chromosomes is claimed to be better than that obtained with high resolution banded somatic chromosomes (16,17).
In situ localization of chromosome 9 sequences in man have been made using M1 and MII air-dried metaphases prepared as in Section 2.2(15).
An M1 cell probed with the No. 9 secondary constriction sequence Xb1 is shown in Figure 5.
For full details  of the in situ hybridization procedures used in these studies, the reader is referred to the original source references and to Chapter 5, Section 6, in this manual.
Recently, in situ nick translation experiments combined with autoradiography have been performed on human (18) and mouse (19,20) air-dried meiotic cells.
In these experiments, chromosome preparations are treated on the slide with DNase I, DNA polymerase I and radioactive deoxyribonucleotides.
Regions of chromosomes particularly susceptible to nuclease attack, that is showing a more open chromatin conformation, can be demonstrated by a localized distribution of grains in the autoradiographic preparations.
For details of the technique, which is essentially the same as that originally applied to somatic chromosomes by Kerem et al.(21), the reader is again referred to original references.
3.
PREPARATION OF FEMALE MEIOTIC CHROMOSOMES BY AIR-DRYING
3.1 Meiotic prophase
The first meiotic division in the female starts during embryogenesis and the prophase stages up to diplotene are found only in the fetal ovary.
Around the time of birth, oocytes enter the resting diplotene or dictyotene stage, where they remain until shortly before ovulation.
Early cytogenetic studies of meiotic prophase in females employing the use of air-drying techniques in the mouse, include those of Rohrborn and Hansmann (22), and in man, those of Luciani and Stahl (23) and Kurilo (24).
Meiotic prophase in the mouse commences on day 13 of gestation with maximum numbers of pachytenes being seen over days 16 — 18.
In the human female, meiosis commences towards the end of the first trimester of fetal development and, with increasing gestational age, more and more cells enter the prophase stages of leptotene, zygotene and pachytene.
Ovaries from aborted human fetuses have been shown to have cells in the pachytene stage during weeks 16–23 of gestation (25).
In recent years, significant developments in the preparation of fetal oocytes in man and the mouse by "microspreading" , have taken place, and because of the superior quality of the preparations and the vast improvement in detail which can be discerned in such spreads, all discussion regarding chromosome preparation at meiotic prophase in oogenesis will be deferred until later (Section 4.3).
3.2 MI and MII oocyte preparation by in vitro culture
Oocytes in MI arc obtained by in vitro culture from the germinal vesicle stage of the arrested dictyate stage, a technique pioneered by Pincus and Enzmann (26) with oocytes of the rabbit.
The stimulation to resume meiosis appears to be the liberation of the oocyte from its follicle (27).
An early published method for the culture of mouse and human oocytes is that of Edwards (28).
Continuation of the culture period will also yield oocytes in MII, but an alternative technique for this stage of oocyte maturation is to collect freshly ovulated oocytes from the fallopian tubes, a procedure described in Section 3.3.
For the preparation of in vitro matured mouse eggs the method of Speed (29) has been used successfully in our own laboratory.
(i) Excise ovaries and place them in physiological saline (0.9%).
Using a dissecting microscope for visualization of follicles, puncture large follicles with a sterile scalpel.
(ii) Pool eggs showing a clear germinal vesicle (gv) in culture medium (Figure 6a), using a sterile micropipette.
The medium used is fetal calf serum (FCS, 9.5 ml) and tryptose phosphate broth (Oxoid, 0.5 ml), containing 0.25 mM sodium pyruvate, 1.0 mM glutamine and 5.56 mM glucose.
(iii) Mechanically remove any follicular cells that remain attached to the eggs by pipetting them in and out of a narrow bore micropipette.
(iv) Place 20–40 eggs in 1 ml of medium in the central well of a 60 x 15 mm organ tissue culture dish (Falcon 3010), and culture under 1 ml of sterile paraffin oil (BDH lightweight 0.840–0.860 g) at 37-C in a high humidity gassed incubator (5% CO2 in air).
After 5 h, eggs reach M1 (Figure 6b) and after 17 h, MII.
(v) Wash the eggs twice and leave for 20 min in fresh 1% sodium citrate at room temperature.
Place a microdrop of 1% sodium citrate with an egg on a grease-free slide using a fine pipette.
Mark the reverse side with a circle.
(vi) The fixation procedure is that of Tarkowski (30), also described in Chapter 5, Section 4, of this manual.
Expel a few drops of 3:1 fixative (methanol:glacial acetic acid) from another fine pipette whose tip is brought just over the microdrop containing the egg.
The optimal number of drops of fixative is three.
(vii) Stain for 5 min with 2% Giemsa or any other conventional stain (see Section 2.3), or C-band as described in Section 2.4.
An alternative method for egg culture to the MI stage and fixation, is that of Kamiguchi et at.
(31), modified for use in the mouse by Sugawara and Mikamo (32).
This technique employs a more gradual fixation procedure and is less likely to produce broken preparations showing artefactual losses of  chromosomes .
(i) Excise ovaries between 12.00 h and 18.00 h on the day of dioestrum, that is the mid-point of the oestrous cycle, as verified by vaginal smearing.
Place them in a watch glass containing Hank's solution and collect the eggs from large follicles by pricking with a sharp needle.
(ii) Remove the adhering cumulus cells mechanically with a fine drawn pipette.
(iii) Culture those eggs having a germinal vesicle in 1 nil of medium for 3.5–6 h at 37-C with 5% CO2 in air.
The culture medium is 85% TC199 (Gibco Biocult) and 15% FCS.
About 72% of eggs reach MI in this medium.
(iv) For MII eggs, a longer culture period is required (see earlier).
Alternatively, these can be collected from the ampullae of the oviducts following ovulation (Section 3.3.
(v) Treat mouse eggs with 0.02% pronase (Sigma) for 15–20 sec to soften the zona pellucida.
(vi) Treat with two hypotonic solutions, first 40% FCS for 10 min, then 1% sodium citrate for 40 min, both treatments at 37-C.
(vii) Place the eggs with a small amount of 1% sodium citrate hypotonic solution gently into a mixture of absolute methanol:glacial acetic acid:distilled water (5:1:4).
This dissolves the zona and gently fixes the eggs.
Up to this stage, the dish or watch glass containing the eggs must be replaced for each change of solution.
Observation of all steps is carried out under the dissecting microscope.
(viii) Five minutes after placing eggs in the above solution, suck up a single egg, together with a small drop of fixative, into a Spemann pipette with a fine point, then expel within a circle (marked on the reverse side) on a grease-free slide.
While the fixative spreads, the egg sticks to the slide near the tip of the pipette.
(ix) Re-fix the egg by an immediate application of Carnoy's solution.
(x) Put the slide at once into a Coplin jar filled with the same fixative and leave for at least 20 min.
(xi) Dip the slide into a mixture of absolute methanol:glacial acetic acid: distilled water (3:3:1) for 1 min to help the egg flatten during the drying process.
(xii) Remove the slide very slowly and air-dry using air which is moisturized by passing through water at 37-C.
(xiii) Stain routinely with Giemsa (Section 2.3), or by C-banding (Section 2.4).
Slides prepared with this method appear to be more reliable than those made using any previous method, including Tarkowski's (30), in respect of the spreading and maintenance of chromosomes (32).
Its use for cultured human M1 oocytes has been described by Wramsby and Liedholm (33).
3.3 MII oocyte preparation following ovulation
Stimulation of meiosis by hormonal injection into the female (Chapter 1, Section 5.4) can be performed to collect eggs in MI and MII.
Oocytes in MI must be collected from ovarian follicles after the required time interval following injection of follicle-stimulating hormone [pregnant mare's serum gonadotropin (PMSG) and human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG).
Oocytes in MII can be collected from the ampullae of the fallopian tubes following ovulation.
In the mouse, a suitable method has been described by Rohrborn and Hansmann (22).
(i) Inject 2.5 IU of PMSG and 2.0 IU of hCG 48 h later, intraperitoneally.
(ii) Collect Mt oocytes from ripe follicles 5 h after hCG, as described in Section 3.2.
(iii) Collect ovulated Mt! eggs 15 h after hCG from the ampullae of the fallopian tubes (see Chapter 2, Section 2.1).
Use pre-warmed medium at 37-C to collect the eggs.
(iv) Dissolve away the cumulus cells surrounding Mt! eggs in a solution of 100 IU/ml hyaluronidase (Type III Sigma) for 2–5 min (see Chapter 2, Section 2.1).
Proceed as in Section 3.2 from step (v) onwards (methods of Speed, ref.29), for chromosome preparation and staining.
A C-banded MII egg from the mouse is shown in Figure 7.
Application of C-banding can aid greatly in the accurate counting of MII chromosomes, for example when aneuploidy studies are made.
In man, a superovulation procedure for the collection of eggs in Mt and MII has been described by Jagiello et at.
(34) and, more recently, the collection of eggs for human in vitro fertilization following hCG administration has been used by Angell et at.
(35).
It should he pointed out, however, that high quality preparations of M1 human eggs in which reliable chiasma counts could be made, have never really been obtained despite numerous attempts on the part of many workers over a number of years.
Little problem has ever been encountered with other mammalian species and why human eggs should give problems, with both the in vitro and in vivo methods, is not at all clear.
4.
MICROSPREADING FOR PROPHASE ANALYSIS
4.1 Surface spreading for electron microscope analysis of spermatocytes
The introduction of a simple and rapid surface microspreading technique for the visualization of the synaptonemal complex at meiotic prophase in insect spermatocytes (36) has revolutionized our understanding of the behaviour of chromosomes during this important stage of meiosis.
Application of the technique to mammalian spermatocytes, pioneered by Moses (37–39), has demonstrated its potential for the analysis of the behaviour of chromosome abnormalities at meiotic prophase as well as the analysis of normal meiotic development.
A large body of "spreading" data is now accumulating in the cytogenetic literature, spanning all eukaryote species from plants to man.
Spread preparations of synaptonemal complexes (SC) are obtained through surface tension on an aqueous solution.
The SC, to which chromatin fibrils are attached, appears prior to or at synapsis, and disappears at or following desynapsis.
The appearance of the pairing events in the SC reflect exactly the pairing behaviour of the meiotic chromosomes throughout prophase.
The spreading technique is not applicable to cells once they reach the metaphase stage.
A wide variety of methods for preparing spreads has been described and it would not be possible here to give precise details of them all.
Nevertheless, some generalizations can be made.
Basically, there are two principle techniques and two levels of observation, light microscope (EM) and electron microscope (EM).
One technique involves the picking up of spread cells from the surface of a saline or sucrose solution onto a slide and is generally used for spermatocyte spreading when an abundance of cells is available in suspension.
The second involves the settling of cells onto a slide surface through a sucrose, saline or other solution, and has been used principally for oocytes, but may be useful for spermatocytes if only a thin suspension is available.
A method of surface spreading of spermatocytes originally devised by Moses (37), based on Counce and Meyer (36), is as follows.
(i) Chop the testis or testicular biopsy in Eagles Minimum Essential Medium (Gibco Biocult, MEM without glutamine), gently macerating the tubules with curved blunt forceps.
Take up the cell suspension in a 1 ml syringe without a needle.
Add a drop or two of MEM to the syringe, making the volume up to 1 ml.
Stand the syringe upright for 1 min to allow larger pieces of debris to settle into the tip.
Then expel and discard these.
Expel the remaining clear suspension and draw it back into the syringe several times to break up clumps of cells.
(ii) Again make up the volume to 1 nil with MEM, expel into a conical glass centrifuge tube, and centrifuge for 5 min at about 150 g at room temperature.
(iii) Remove the supernatant, except for about twice the volume of the pellet.
Resuspend the pellet.
Keep the suspension on ice.
(iv) With a micropipette, carefully expel a drop of suspension and gently touch to the surface of the spreading solution.
The latter consists of a filtered 0.5% solution of NaCl filling a black embryological dissecting dish.
Prior to adding the cell suspension, sweep the surface clean with either lens paper or a hard surface toilet paper, and adjust the liquid level so that it is slightly convex.
Allow the spread to stabilize for 1 or 2 min.
(v) Prepare copper girds (Pelco:GC-100) as follows.
Film the grids with 0.3% formvar, and then coat with carbon.
Before use, make the grids hydrophilic by ionizing in a slow discharge (2 min, 1.3 kV, 0.1 Torr).
Keep the forceps used for handling grids scrupulously clean and wipe them after each step by punching the tips through No.1 Whatman filter paper, or bibulous paper.
(vi) Touch the grids one at a time, to different regions of the surface of the spread.
Use approximately 10 grids.
(vii) Fixation.
The fixative is 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M sucrose; heat to 60–80C with six drops of NaOH and stir till clear.
Finally adjust the pH to 8.5 with pH 9 borate buffer.
Filter and store at 4C for up to 1 week.
(viii) Quickly float the grids on the clean surface of the fixative in a small dish and leave there, covered, for at least 5, and no more than 10 min, five grids per dish.
Alternatively, dispense 10 double drops of fixative on a wax plate (dental wax, or a sheet of parafilm stuck down on a glass surface), and float each grid on the surface of a drop (1 grid per drop — use each drop once only).
Small disposable beakers, inverted, are used as covers during fixing.
(ix) After fixation, remove each grid with clamping, anti-capillary forceps, drain excess fixative by touching the edge of the grid to the surface of the fixative, and hold the grid face down on the surface of 0.4% Photoflo (Eastman Kodak, freshly prepared in borate buffer, pH 8 and filtered before use).
Hold for 20 30 sec, moving gently to agitate.
If floated, grids tend to sink.
Drain the grid by touching the edge to filter paper, allow to dry partially under an incandescent lamp, and then place on filter paper in a Petri dish to complete drying.
If Photoflo creeps onto the reverse side of the grid, it may leave drying artefacts.
Grids may be stained at any point after drying (some grids have been stained a year or more after preparation).
(x) Staining.
The stain is a 1:3 dilution in 95% ethanol of a 4% solution of phosphotungstic acid (PTA) freshly made up and filtered just before use.
Using the anti-capillary forceps, hold the dried grid face-down on the surface of the ethanolic PTA for 1 min with gentle agitation, drain on the surface, transfer to the surface of 95% ethanol to rinse for 15–30 sec, drain on filter paper and allow to air-dry.
N.B. Care must be taken not to allow either stain or ethanol to flow onto the non-specimen-bearing surface, as this produces surface tensions during drying that may rupture the carbon — formvar film.
(xi) Before or after staining, align the grids face-up on a microscope slide, cover with a No. 1 coverslip, and examine with dry 20 X or 40 X phase objectives.
Suitably spread spermatocytes can be recognized, and SCs are clearly visible.
Entire SCs, attachment plaques and kinetochore regions are resolvable.
Desirable grids can thus be selected quickly.
(xii) An EM operating at low magnification, is best suited for karyotype study (250–3000x).
The above method is specifically designed for EM analysis of SC preparations.
Nevertheless, because SCs and other structures such as nucleolar organizing regions (NORs) and attachment plaques are visible at the light microscope level when silver staining is used, a number of authors have devised methods for LM analysis (40), or for sequential LM and EM investigation (41).
LM observation can be carried out rapidly and can be used to scan slides and select good cells for further analysis in the EM.
One such method is described in the following section.
4.2 Spreading for light microscope and electron microscope sequential analysis
The procedure currently used in our own laboratory is an extension of the LM method of Fletcher(40).
4.2.1 Preparation of cell suspension
(i) For the mouse.
Remove the testis from tunica albuginea and place in medium F 10 supplemented with 20% FCS (Gibco Biocult).
Chop with fine scissors ill a tilted glass Petri dish.
Allow tubule fragments to settle for about 20 min.
Draw off the suspension with a Pasteur pipette leaving debris behind, and transfer to a conical centrifuge tube.
Centrifuge at 150 for 10 min.
Discard most of the supernatant, leaving behind just enough to resuspend the cells.
(ii) For Human spermatocyte preparation.
Collect testicular biopsies in Dulbecco"phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, Dulbecco A tablets from Oxoid), and chop immediately with fine scissors.
Agitate the cells and tubule fragments using a stirring bar and magnetic stirrer for about I h.
Draw off the cell suspension and centrifuge at 150 g for 10 min in a conical centrifuge tube.
Discard the supernatant and resuspend the cells in fresh PBS.
Wash the cells three times and leave in a small volume of PBS.
4.2.2 Spreading the cells
(i) Prior to making spreads, coat pre-cleaned alcohol-washed slides in an 0.5% solution of Optilux (Falcon) plastic in chloroform (42).
Use a Coplin jar for dipping, and then stand the slides on end in a rack to dry in a dust-free atmosphere.
When dry, seal the plastic coating to the edges of the slides with Holdtite rubber adhesive.
(ii) Spray 50 mm watch glasses with black "DEXION" paint to provide a  water-repellent surface.
Any paint which will give a dark background and a  water-repellent surface can be used.
(iii) Fill the black watch glass with the spreading solution (0.2 M sucrose, made fresh and filtered); the sucrose should sit in a nice "bubble" , and the level of the solution should be higher than the edge of the watch glass (6–7 nil).
(iv) Draw up a small amount of the cell suspension into a long form Pasteur pipette and allow one drop (-0.02 nil) to hang from its tip.
Gently touch this drop onto the surface of the spreading solution.
The process can be watched under a low power dissecting microscope, but this is not absolutely necessary as the cell spreading can be readily observed by eye.
(v) Allow the cells to spread over the surface for about 30 sec then pick them up by touching the surface of the solution with the plastic-coated slide.
(vi) Leave the slide lying flat on the bench for about 10 min to allow more cells to settle, then fix the cells in paraformaldehyde.
(vii) After 5 — 10 min, drain off all excess fixative and wash the slide for 30 sec in 0.4% Photoflo from a wash bottle.
(viii) Allow the slide to dry on the bench at room temperature.
4.2.3 Staining
Staining can be carried out most conveniently by the rapid colloidal silver method of Howell and Black (43), a technique originally developed for staining of NORs.
The method requires the use of two solutions.
(i) Prepare a colloidal developer solution by dissolving 2 g of powdered gelatin in  100 ml of de-ionized water and 1 ml of pure formic acid.
Stir constantly for 10 min in order to dissolve the gelatin.
The solution is stable for 2 weeks.
(ii) Prepare an aqueous silver nitrate solution by dissolving 4 g of AgNO 3 in 8 ml of de-ionized water.
This solution is stable.
Store both the colloidal developer and silver solution in capped, amber-glass bottles.
(iii) Pipette two drops of the colloidal developer and four drops of the aqueous silver nitrate onto the surface of the microscope slide containing spread cells.
Mix the solutions and cover with a coverslip.
(iv) Place the slide on the surface of a slide warmer (hot plate) which has been stabilized at 70-C.
(v) Within 30 sec, the silver-staining mixture will turn yellow, and within 2 min, it will become golden brown.
Remove the slide and the coverslip and rinse off the staining mixture using de-ionized water.
(vi) Blot the slide dry and examine immediately.
4.2.4 Preparation of griefs for electron microscopy
(i) Locate good silver-stained spreads under low power (X 25) with the LM.
Using a Leitz diamond slide marker, score a circle in the plastic coating around the cells required for EM analysis.
(ii) When all desired cells on a slide are located, float off the round discs of plastic onto the surface of distilled water contained in a large square glass staining dish.
This is achieved by gently lowering the slide at an angle, into the water, when the surface tension will pull the discs of plastic away from the slide.
(iii) Pick up discs one by one as follows.
Using watchmakers forceps carefully lower an EM grid [G200 HS Cu (Gilder)], to a position under the disc.
Gently hold the disc in place on the surface of a grid by means of a strong eyelash mounted to the end of a thin wooden (orange) stick, and pick up the disc by bringing the grid up under the disc and out of the water.
Allow the grids to dry before EM examination.
Spread diplotene spermatocytes prepared by this method from the mouse (Figure 8a) and human (Figure 8b) are shown.
In Figure 8a, the preparation is photographed in the light microscope, in Figure 8b, at the EM level.
It should be noted that visualization of centromeres and the central element of the SC is not usually possible in silver-stained preparations.
For these, staining should be carried out in PTA (Section 4.1).
The application of this spreading method in our laboratory to the spermatocytes of a translocation heterozygote in man (44), to several inversion  heterozygotes in the mouse (45), and in the study of XY pairing in the human male (46), can be found in the literature in addition to many other published accounts where spreading techniques have been employed in male meiotic prophase analysis.
The technique has indeed opened up a whole new area of meiotic investigation in the male.
4.3 Spreading of oocytes
The material (mouse or human ovaries) must be obtained as fresh as possible.
After 24 h the morphology of the pachytene cells is greatly reduced.
In the human female   fetal ovary the maximum number of pachytenes occurs at about 26 weeks, although they appear as early as 14 weeks and continue to about 30 weeks of gestation.
Maximum numbers of pachytenes occur on about day 18 post-coitum in mouse, although this will vary with the strain.
A simple spreading method for oocytes, pioneered by Speed (47), is as follows.
(i) Place the ovary in Dulbecco's PBS and, in the case of human, cut into small pieces about 2 mm3 using a scalpel (for mouse one whole ovary is used to prepare one slide).
(ii) Place one piece of ovarian tissue (or whole ovary in the case of mouse) onto a clean slide in 2–3 drops of 0.2 M (4.5%) sucrose (made up in distilled water).
(iii) Tease the material apart using the blunt edge of the scalpel and a dissecting needle.
Remove large debris and disperse the cells in the sucrose by gently stirring with the needle.
Oocytes will sink through the sucrose and adhere to the slide.
(iv) If cells are required for examination at LM level only, leave the slide to dry for a minimum of 30 min and even overnight.
If analysis at the EM is necessary transfer the cells in sucrose to a plastic-coated slide (see Section 4.2.2) and carefully spread over an area 1 — 1.5 cm2 without touching the coating.
(v) Fixation and staining and the preparation of EM grids is as described in Sections 4.2.2,4.2.3 and 4.2.4.
Spread pachytene oocytes prepared by this method from the mouse (Figure 9a) and human (Figure 9b) are shown.
The mouse pachytene spread is photographed at LM level: the human spread is taken in the EM.
The application of the spreading technique to oocytes has been of enormous benefit, just as in spermatocytes, in revealing intimate detail of pairing and other configurations at meiotic prophase.
Detail of normal oocytes, and oocytes showing a variety of anomalies, are given in papers for mouse by Speed (47) and Speed and Chandley (48) and for the human by Speed (25).
In the study of human trisomy 21 oocytes (49) and mouse XO oocytes (50), the technique has proved invaluable in revealing the synaptic configurations present in these abnormal situations.
5.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author is grateful to R.M.Speed for advice in the preparation of Section 3 and for providing Figures 6 and 9.
J.D.Brook is thanked for Figures 1d and 7.
Karyotyping and sexing of gametes, embryos and fetuses and in situ hybridization to chromosomes
E.P.EVANS
1.
INTRODUCTION
The importance of cytogenetic techniques to studies of mammalian development is well established, for example, in the identification of chromosomally unbalanced zygotes, sexing of embryos, recognition of the inactive X chromosome, analysis of chimaerism, mapping of native or introduced genes by in situ hybridization and the study of chromatin structure.
In a field where biological material is limited, experimental cytogenetic techniques often require only a few cells.
Mammalian embryogenesis provides an abundant source of mitotic divisions.
However, the yield of metaphase plates of sufficient quality for cytogenetic study is determined by the accessibility and response of these divisions to established chromosome preparatory techniques.
The purpose of this chapter is to describe some of the available techniques and the ways of utilizing the preparations obtained by them in a variety of applications which range from the simple determination of chromosome counts to the in situ hybridization of gene probes to banded chromosomes.
Most of the experience described has been gained from the mouse but many of the techniques and applications are equally suitable for other mammals, including man.
2.
BASIC TECHNIQUES
The one requirement for the cytogenetic study of mitotic cells is to produce a well spread, flattened metaphase plate as free from overlapping chromosomes as possible.
In attempting to achieve this goal, most of the techniques currently used involve the same four essential steps which are:
(i) initial recovery of the mitotic cells which may be aided by earlier exposure to a mitotic arrestant,(ii) treatment with a hypotonic solution so that they swell,(iii) fixation to preserve chromosome morphology, and (iv) spreading and flattening onto glass slides.
The methods of applying these four steps will vary according to the stage of embryogenesis being examined and they will be described in turn.
Once preparations are obtained they can be treated to serve a number of purposes and some of these will be described.
3.
EQUIPMENT
The equipment required for the recovery of whole and parts of pre- and post-implantation embryos is described in Chapters 2 and 3 and can be used for recovering suitable specimens to make chromosome preparations; however, for this purpose, requirements can often be less exacting.
Any reasonable dissecting microscope with incident and transmitted light, a good working distance and an optical magnification of up to X 50 will suffice.
Moreover, specimens can be handled with sufficiently fine hand drawn micropipettes and, providing the specimens are handled quickly, they can be left in unsophisticated media without serum or gassing.
If possible, siliconizing of equipment should be avoided since any carry over of silicon can severely inhibit the spreading of mitotic cells.
A centrifuge with slow acceleration/deceleration and providing 200 g is desirable for handling cells made into suspensions.
Since slides are treated at a number of different temperatures in the protocols, it is convenient if a sufficient number of water baths and ovens can be maintained at these temperatures without the need for continuous readjustment.
Examination of chromosomes, particularly if they are banded and carry silver grains, is optically demanding and the best possible microscope should be obtained.
Ideally, this should have a phase-contrast facility for checking unstained slides, good quality X 16 and X 100 objectives and a built-in 35 mm camera.
It should always be set up to give maximum resolution.
Filters are useful accessories for viewing and photographing stained chromosomes; interference filters such as the Balzer No.8 both sharpen the image and enhance the contrast.
A number of 35 mm films are available and are used to photograph chromosomes.
Each has its attributes but for all round performance Kodak technical Pan film 2415 is recommended, with subsequent development in Kodak HC1100 developer for about the suggested time at the manufacturer's dilution D.
All slides used for making chromosome preparations should be clean.
Most commercially available pre-cleaned slides are contaminated, as is evident from the interference rings which are visible between the slides when they are removed from the box.
Pre-cleaned slides are best further cleaned by leaving in a 1:1 mixture of absolute alcohol:concentrated HCl overnight, washed thoroughly the next day in running tap water, rinsed in de-ionized water and stored in a 1:1 mixture of absolute alcohol:diethyl ether.
Immediately prior to using, take out the slides with forceps and, avoiding direct finger contact, wipe dry on coarse, grease-free tissues such as Kimwipes.
4.
CHROMOSOME PREPARATIONS FROM EMBRYOS AND FETUSES
4.1 Preparations from pronuclear stages
The mitotic divisions recovered from the pronuclear stages are unique because they reveal gametic chromosome complements; thus, in a fertilized egg, male and female contributions can be distinguished, and in unfertilized eggs, the female chromosomes can be revealed by parthenogenetic activation with a variety of treatments (ref.1, and see Chapter 12).
Studies of pronuclear division in fertilized eggs are useful for assessing the primary level of chromosome abnormalities, some of which may act as zygotic lethals or become disguised in subsequent cleavages.
The single pronuclear haploid  eggs produced by activation serve as a starting point for parthenogenetic studies in mammals(2).
Due to the asynchrony of fertilization and the time of appearance of pronuclear chromosomes, natural ovulations and matings are unrewarding and various other procedures have had to be introduced to improve recovery.
Superovulation (Chapter 1, Section 5.4) increases both the number of eggs recovered and the synchrony, and, if combined with the use of a mitotic arrestant to accumulate eggs in metaphase, the success rate is greatly increased.
However, over-exposure to the arrestant is  detrimental in that male and female complements lose their morphological identity due to chromosome contraction.
Initially, the male can be distinguished from the female complement by the more elongated chromosomes and staining differences (3) but, as development progresses, the two become more equivalent and less easy to separate.
If it is required    to positively identify the components, it is recommended that one of the parents is made homozygous for a marker chromosome such as T6 (Section 5.1).
A number of methods have been described (3,1,4) to obtain pronuclear chromosomes and they include the use of superovulation with fertilization and mitotic arrest in vivo and also activation or fertilization and mitotic arrest in vitro.
Many of the methods involve both similar and different steps but most, if not all, produce the final preparation by the Tarkowski method (5) of fixing and spreading.
In Table 1, an in vivo/in vitro method is described, although it should be noted that there are a number of alternative methods available.
A preparation obtained by the method described in Table 1 is illustrated in Figure 1.
4.2 Preparations from pre-implantation stages
Chromosome preparations can be obtained from all the recoverable stages of pre-implantation embryos described in Chapter 2.
Since, after normal ovulation, between 6 and 12 eggs are recovered, success is measured by the number which are undergoing mitotic division and the number of divisions which can be analysed.
The numbers ovulated can be considerably increased by superovulation (Chapter 1, Section 5.4).
Embryos from both induced and normal ovulations show asynchrony in development from an early stage of cleavage and preparatory techniques have to be devised to attempt to recover as many as possible with analysable chromosomes.
Injection of the mother with a mitotic arrestant many hours before embryo recovery will increase the proportion containing mitotic divisions but long exposure also leads to excessive chromosome contraction which makes analysis difficult.
A balance can be achieved by exposing the eggs for a moderate time; for example, a 4 h in vivo exposure accumulates analysable   metaphases in 50 80% of embryos at the early morula to early blastocyst stage.
A thorough knowledge of the cleavage rate and expected fluctuations in the mouse strain being used provides a useful guide to the timing of exposure to the mitotic arrestant.
Pre-implantation development can proceed in vitro in culture (Chapter 2) and the arrestant added to the medium at the stage of development required.
Preparations are then made in the same way as for the embryos recovered directly from the mother.
It should be noted that chromosomally abnormal eggs frequently lag in development as compared with their normal counterparts (6) and if they become amitotic, it is possible they may either be misrepresented or excluded from a scored sample.
If samples are scored for aneuploidy, a significant chromosome count identifying aneuploidy is regarded as consisting of minimally two mitotic cells with the same count.
The main method which has been used for obtaining chromosome preparations from pre-implantation embryos is again that of Tarkowski (5) and it is described in Table 2.
If conditions of hypotonic treatment and fixation are controlled, the method can give satisfactory preparations from most pre-implantation stages (Figure 2a and b) except possibly from the very late blastocyst stage.
The alternative is either to process these by the "double fixation and softening" method of Dyban and Baranov (7) or to disaggregate then, on a slide in 60% acetic acid as described in Table 3a.
4.3 Preparations from post-implantation stages
The technical approach is determined by the composition and dimension of the specimen and also by the nature of the investigation.
These are factors which decide whether the specimen is initially handled as a solid and disaggregated after fixation, or is immediately disaggregated and handled from the outset as a cell suspension.
Because of their dimensions (5 mm), the majority of the embryos described in Chapter 3, and the tissues isolated from them, are best treated as solids to conserve the small specimen.
The fetal membranes from older embryos are also best handled initially as solid tissue because of difficulties in their mechanical disaggregation.
Following hypotonic treatment and fixation, solid tissues are finally disaggregated in acetic acid (method described in Table 3a).
The preparations obtained will successfully C-band but rarely produce good G-banded karyotypes.
If preparations are required from whole older embryos (>5 mm) or from larger organs such as livers and spleens of day 12–20 embryos from which some loss by centrifugation can be tolerated, the specimens are first mechanically disaggregated into cell suspensions and processed as described in Table 3b.
Although the technique is more time consuming, the mitotic cells obtained are of better quality and are useful for C- and G-banding (Figure and can also be used for in situ hybridization (Section 6).
As is apparent from Chapter 3 (Section 2), the growth and development taking place in the early fetus provides a rich source of mitotic division.
Later, the processes slow down with the shift to increased differentiation with a rapid fall in mitotic index in both embryo and fetal membranes after day 14, thus it becomes difficult to obtain chromosome preparations from the later stages, particularly shortly preceding birth.
Following birth, there is a resurgence of mitotic activity and excellent preparations can be obtained from the liver and spleen up to 5 days later.
In the young fetus, the high mitotic index obviates the use of a mitotic arrestant such as Colcemid (Sigma) or Velbe (Lilly), but if the mitotic index is low, as in older specimens, or if large numbers of mitotic cells are required, mitotic arrest can be used to advantage.
Injection into the mother is not recommended since the placental barrier poses a problem in the transmission to the fetus.
The arrestants can be directly injected into the later fetuses to greatly increase metaphase numbers but the procedure requires operative skill and can be traumatic to the mother.
A much simpler way of introducing an arrestant is to remove the tissue and incubate briefly in culture medium (see Chapter 3, Sections 5 and 6) containing 0.1 μg/ml of either Colcemid or Velbe.
If the incubation period is for less than I h, which should be sufficient to produce some metaphase accumulation, there is probably no need to include serum or to gas the medium.
The vast majority of chromosomally unbalanced mouse fetuses die between day 6 and IS (8) and mitotic activity often decreases several hours or even days prior to the event.
Nevertheless, even if the embryo is in a fairly advanced stage of resorption, some mitotic preparations can be obtained from the fetal membranes and used to establish whether death was chromosomally related.
The facility offered by the membranes for karyotyping lends itself to studies in which there is a need to preserve the abnormal or normal embryo intact.
5.
CHROMOSOME ANALYSIS BY STAINING
5.1 Mouse chromosomes after conventional staining
The normal mouse has 40 chromosomes which are all acrocentric with centromeres close to the terminus and almost invisible short arms.
In mid-metaphase, mouse chromosomes range in length from about 2 to 5 μm.
This morphology does not lend itself to analysis after conventional staining since only a few of the autosomes show distinguishing features in the form of secondary constrictions (Figure 3a) and, of the sex chromosomes, only the Y of some strains can be recognized by virtue of occasionally visible unique features (Figure 3a).
Conventional staining is, however, useful for chromosome counting in situations in which aneuploidy is suspected.
Some of the methods are given in Table 4.
The problem presented by the uniform morphology of conventionally stained mouse chromosomes in the recognition of chimaeric or mosaic conditions can be overcome by using marker chromosomes to label cells.
The markers can be in the form of the   shorter and/or longer chromosomes produced by induced, unequal reciprocal translocations, or spontaneously arising metacentric Robertsonian fusions in laboratory or feral populations.
Examples of these markers, including the much used T6 chromosome, are shown in Figure 3b and c.
Y chromosome recognition after conventional staining can be greatly simplified by  using variants which have arisen spontaneously.
Two are available (refs. 9 and 10) and both appear as short, sub-metacentric chromosomes (Figure 3d).
5.2 C-banded preparations and their use for Y chromosome recognition
C-banding methods demonstrate constitutive heterochromatin which, in the mouse, is normally composed of centromere-associated satellite DNA.
Inter-strain differences in the amount of C-banded material occurs between certain autosomes (11) and have been used as cell markers in chimaeras (12).
In contrast, they chromosome in all known strains is virtually without a C-band and this absence has proved an easy and positive method of identifying cellular sex.
The C-banding method used in this laboratory (see also Chapter 4, Section 2.4) is described in Tables and its use illustrated in Figure 3e.
5.3 G-banded preparations and their analysis
In common with other mammalian species, the individual chromosomes of the mouse can be recognized by using a variety of different banding methods but G-banding has found the greatest favour and also provides the basis for the standard idiogram which is illustrated in Figure 4.
One method of achieving this differentiation is described in Table 6 and the result illustrated in Figure 5.
The latter represents the traditional method of analysing the karyotype with the homologous chromosomes arranged in pairs in decreasing order of linear length so that any disparities should become obvious.
With experience.
much of the analysis can be done at the microscope and cut-out photographs need only be used to detect subtle changes.
The standard idiogram lists 312 distinct regions within the mouse karyotype but rarely, if ever, have they all been observed in a single metaphase plate.
The nomenclature adopted (13) has the advantage of being able to accommodate further band information if this should materialize, either through the development of higher resolution techniques or from more astute observations.
Some additional information has emerged but, unfortunately, mouse chromosomes have not responded well to the high resolution techniques developed for human chromosomes and it is only recently that a higher resolution idiogram has been published (14).
Currently, the standard idiogram has remained unchanged since its adoption in 1974, although an updated version is planned for the near future.
The G-banded karyotype has many uses which include, for example, the identification of absent, additional or aberrant chromosomes, the identification of balanced and unbalanced chromosome segments alter meiotic segregation and for the linear placement of loci on the chromosome either following in situ hybridization (5,6), or by traditional genetic methods using marker genes, linkage and translocation breakpoints.
From the point of view of describing abnormal karyotypes, the recommended nomenclature rules (15) should be followed.
The only consistent variation found within the G-banded karyotypes from different mouse strains has been in the amount of A1 band material (regions which are synonymous with C-bands) observed in certain chromosomes.
A I band sizes are frequently a strain characteristic and inter-strain differences can be used, for example, to monitor for genetic contamination (16).
Some of the A1 band differences are illustrated in Figure 5b.
5.4 Staining for the inactive X chromosome
If it is required to cytogenetically demonstrate the activity or otherwise of paternally or maternally derived X chromosomes in cells of fetal origin, the first requirement is to mark one of them so that it can be distinguished from the other one.
Suitable markers include X-autosomal reciprocal translocations such as T (X; 4) 37H or the X-autosomal insertion Is (1n7; X) 1Ct, both of which present a marker chromosome longer than the normal longest mouse chromosome (see ref-17 for a list of such markers).
The second requirement is to examine the mitotic cells under conditions where the inactive can be distinguished from the active X. Numerous methods are available which, for example, include autoradiography and systems of 5"-bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) substitution, but   here, the simpler Kanda (18) method will be described (Table 7) since it can be done quickly using the minimum of equipment.
Unfortunately, the Kanda method is destructive and many of the mitotic cells become unscorable but a sufficient number are conserved to give a clear indication of X-chromosome activity.
Figure 6a illustrates such a mitotic cell in which the normal X is inactive and is seen as being shorter than normal (the X is normally the fifth longest chromosome) and darker staining than the other chromosomes.
The other X, marked with Is (In7; X) 1Ct, remains unchanged although it should be noted that the anticipated longer length is not always obvious.
Should the marked chromosome constitute the inactive X, however, it is reasonably easy to observe as the darkest and longest chromosome in the cell.
The differential staining reflects a different response to chromatin uncoiling brought about by the extended hypotonic treatment (Table 7).
Reasons for assuming that the dark staining does demonstrate inactivity are well founded since, in a number of comparative tests, cytogenetic determination has been found to concur with enzymatic determination.
5.5 Staining for sex chromatin
If an investigation requires embryos to be sexed and chromosome preparations are considered unhelpful due, for example, to the Y chromosome not being distinctive, or efforts to C-band are not considered worthwhile, it is possible to separate females from males by the presence or absence of sex chromatin.
The stained sex chromatin body in mouse nuclei is not as distinctive as in the nuclei of some other mammalian species because the chromocentres (regions in which centromeric heterochromatin collect) are localized and stain up almost as intensely.
Nevertheless, it can be used for sexing and the mouse amnion is a favourable source of nuclei (19).
Preparations can be made by isolating the amnion, fixing it in 3:1 methanol: glacial acetic acid and spreading the nuclei in aqueous 60% acetic acid as described in Table 3a.
The spread nuclei can be simply stained in acetic orcein (Gurr) under a coverslip and if the staining is slow, or the slides are to be kept for a short time, the coverslips can be ringed with rubber solution (Weldtite) to prevent the stain drying out.
If the nuclei are from a female fetus, the sex chromatin body becomes visible in a proportion of the nuclei as the dark staining body illustrated in Figure 6b.
The proportion will vary between 40 and 80% in nuclei from different female fetuses, most of the variation resulting from technical reasons such as, for example , the number of nuclei which flatten on the slide with the body in an easily observed peripheral position.
In these nuclei the body can readily be distinguished from the chromocentres since it is appreciably darker staining and lies in a small "notch" in the nuclear membrane.
The nuclei from some male fetuses may present false-positive sex chromatin bodies due to the occasional peripheral location of a large chromocentre, but the total from any one rarely exceeds 10%.
6.
IN SITU HYBRIDIZATION TO CHROMOSOMES
If the requirement for in situ hybridization to chromosomes is to probe for the completely unknown localization of unique sequences in the mouse genome, existing techniques are limited to tissue samples which give a plentiful supply of both slides and mitotic cells.
This is due to the likelihood of the technical loss of material in proceeding through the protocol, the possibility of a weak hybridization signal from small weakly labelled sequences and the need to be able to score a statistically significant sample of silver grain counts.
A further problem arises from the featureless morphology of mouse chromosomes and the need to introduce some form of banding technique to identify the individual chromosomes and the fine regions within these.
If repetitive sequences are to be probed, because of the stronger expected hybridization signal, it may be possible to work with fewer slides and mitotic cells but the need for banding remains.
On the other hand, with both unique and repetitive sequences, if they are known to map to a certain chromosome, it may be possible to locate them approximately using unbanded marker chromosomes to identify that chromosome.
Moreover, if the approximate position on a chromosome is also known, it may be possible to split that region if an appropriate unequal reciprocal translocation is available.
Since the number of suitable translocations, reciprocal and Robertsonian, which can be used as easily recognized markers is limited (see 17 for listings and linkage information), it is proposed here to describe a more general approach to in situ hybridization assuming   no prior knowledge of the position of the unique sequence in the genome.
It should be borne in mind, however, that if repeat sequences are to be probed, or if it is known to which chromosome or approximate chromosome region the repetitive or the unique sequences map, procedures can be simplified.
6.1 Embryo fibroblast culture and replication banding
The problem of introducing a banding regime which survives the in situ hybridization protocol has been largely overcome in man through the introduction of replication G-banding by BrdU substitution (20).
The use of this method in the mouse is currently in its infancy and since the procedure requires cells to pass through a round of replication in the presence of BrdU, it can only be used in cultured cells, which, because of the numbers required, are limited to third passage embryonic fibroblasts from pooled day 12 — IS embryos.
A number of methods for initiating embryonic fibroblast culture are described in the literature (e.g. 21) and it is not proposed to review them here but only to mention the introduction of BrdU and subsequent harvest of the cells (Table 8).
Embryonic fibroblast culture and replication banding has the advantage of providing a large number of slides and mitotic cells which could be used for several different probes but the disadvantages of having to pool a considerable number of embryos for the initiation of the culture and a lack of knowledge as to the source and lineage of the cells which become established in culture.
It is also a time-consuming procedure.
6.2 Pre- and post-banding methods
The alternatives to providing morphologically recognizable chromosomes without resorting to replication banding are either to "pre-band" or to "post-band" after hybridization.
Pre-banding, which, for example, can he done using the G-banding procedure described here (Table 6), does not survive the in situ hybridization protocol so mitotic cells have to be photographed, their positions located by either vernier readings or a graticule slide, and re-photographed after hybridization in order to compare bands and silver grain positions.
Since, for most purposes, at least 50 G-banded cells have to be photographed, this  procedure is tedious and time consuming.
Post-banding after hybridization can be achieved using Wright's stain (Gurr or Merck)(22) but often, band definition is not detailed and, from hearsay, a number of researchers have experienced problems with the method and failed to obtain bands.
Pre- or post-banding avoids the need to culture cells since adequate numbers of mitotic cells can be obtained directly from mid-term fetuses (Table 3b).
In summary, replication banding of embryonic fibroblast cells provides the best means of locating unique sequences in an unmarked mouse genome and a protocol for this method is described in Table 8 and the results illustrated in Figure 7a.
References to pre- and post-banding are also made in Table 8 and pre-banding illustrated in Figure 7b.
The use of an unequal reciprocal translocation unbanded, to both mark and split a chromosome region, is illustrated in Figure 7c.
6.3 Scoring
Scoring procedures will be determined by the nature of the investigation.
If the location of the sequence, or sequences, is completely unknown and requires fine mapping to a G-band (replication bands are equivalent) on a chromosome, the practice is to identify each chromosome and to score the position of each silver grain overlying it.
Before commencing, a decision should be made as to whether grains touching chromosome edges are to be included or not.
It is convenient to prepare scoring sheets which include a G-banded copy of each mouse chromosome (Figure 4) and to enter grain positions directly on to them.
In this way any "hot spots" will become apparent as scoring proceeds.
The aim should be to score between 50 and 100 mitotic cells.
Results can be analysed by reference to the total number of grains overlying the chromosomes in all the mitotic cells scored, the total number of grains overlying each individual chromosome and the significance of the latter in relation to the number expected to overlie that chromosome assuming that grains are randomly distributed per unit length of chromosome.
A table of the haploid percentage length is published (23).
For example, if 265 grains are scored overlying the chromosomes in 100 mitotic cells, and since chromosome 1 represents 7.20% of the genome, then approximately 19 grains (7.20% of 265 = 19.08) would be expected to overlie the homologous pair.
By estimating the expected number of each chromosome and comparing it with the observed number, any significant departures can be recorded.
If a significant departure appears for a certain chromosome, the chromosome can be examined in more detail and the position of the peak grain distribution related to the G-bands.
If marker chromosomes are used, scoring can be simplified since the expected to the observed grain counts need only be related to the total percentage length of the markers within the genome.
It should be noted, however, that if markers are used in the heterozygous state, the expected grain count is halved since the other half is expected to overlie the unmarked, and therefore unscored normal homologues.
7.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Within the space available, an attempt has been made to describe some of the techniques available for obtaining and utilizing chromosome preparations from different stages of embryogenesis.
Some of the innovators of techniques have been acknowledged in  the bibliography, through lack of space others have not and to these I apologize.
I particularly wish to record my gratitude to Dr Veronica Buckle and to Mike Burtenshaw for their help in establishing the in situ hybridization methods.