

The Context of Sleep Research
The Obvious: Beliefs about Sleep and Dreaming
(a) Sleep folklore
For all the time that we spend doing it — about one third of our lives — we have very little natural insight into the sleeping process.
Even the simple act of observing a sleeper normally requires forgoing sleep oneself.
Typically, the object of scrutiny is either a child in bed or our spouse asleep in front of the television.
And what is there to see?
They may twitch, move around to an apparently more comfortable position, but their eyes remain closed and they remain unresponsive.
They offer no clues about whatever mental activity is going on, apart from occasional mumblings.
Rarely, they might talk more coherently, but what is said is seldom sensible.
Our memory of our own sleep is usually confined to one or two confusing and ill-recalled dreams, and some individuals claim never even to dream.
The quality of sleep is normally judged by the degree of oblivion achieved, in the same way that digestion is counted as most satisfactory when we are least aware of it.
Sleep still has no obvious rationale, except that we do it when we feel sleepy or "tired" , and after doing it we're "rested" — and don't feel sleepy any more.
If you ask a roomful of people whether anyone has not had any sleep in the previous twenty-four hours, it is very rare indeed to find a serious candidate.
In the fifteen years that I have been giving lectures on sleep and dreaming to many groups of sixth-formers as well as undergraduate students, I have, in fact, only once had a single positive response to this question.
We all sleep, and as a rule we do it at night in one long session of up to nine or ten hours, and during the day we stay awake.
About a third to a half the usable space in any private house is taken up by special rooms devoted to sleeping.
It is most unusual for anyone to do it in the kitchen, the hall, the bathroom or the dining room, although naps may be taken in the living room.
But doing the whole thing — removing daytime clothes, putting on special sleeping garments, emptying the bladder, cleaning the teeth and finally getting into the purpose-built sleeping furniture — is something that is only done in the bedrooms specially built for the purpose.
In many households it is conventional for everyone to retire at the same time, and to re-emerge simultaneously in the morning, with scant toleration being shown to individuals who do not conform.
A sleepless alien might legitimately conclude that Earthlings' central preoccupation was this peculiar sort of inactivity.
What are the obvious truths about sleep?
What do most people believe it is for, what do their dreams and other experiences during sleep signify, and what may happen to them if sleep is disturbed or prevented?
A survey I conducted among Hull University students and staff investigating their beliefs about sleep and dreaming is fully reported in the Appendix on page 218.
They were asked to indicate whether various assertions (such as "An hour's sleep before midnight is worth two afterwards" ) were true, possibly true, or untrue.
Some of the questions concerned frequency, so answers ranging from "Never" to "Always" were available to assertions such as "Dreams can foretell the future" .
The results will be referred to as being from the "Hull survey" as they become relevant.
The analogy between resting after physical exertion and the relief from sleepiness offered by sleep is very compelling, and many people would agree with it.
The survey of students and graduates at Hull showed that over two-thirds of them agreed with the statement that "Exercise improves the quality of sleep" .
It logically follows from this that a fit person should need less sleep than an unfit one, or a man than a woman, or a grown-up than a child.
There are plenty of folk remedies for improving sleep, and maxims, adages and proverbs concerning sleep, and they give some insight into received views.
My Afrikaner grandfather was fond of repeating that a man needs six hours, a woman seven, and a bloody fool eight' hours' sleep — a sentiment which nicely incorporated both his simple male chauvinism and a Calvinist abomination of indulgence.
The common  English proverb "Early to bed and early to rise, makes a man healthy, wealthy and wise" is less concerned with self-denial than with a prescription for regular habits.
Similarly, the Welsh "Go to bed with the lamb and rise with the lark" allows a generous amount of time asleep, and is more concerned with its timing.
The idea that sleep is especially important in growing children, that it may somehow be essential to growth and development, has always been prevalent.
The notion that "one hour's sleep before midnight is worth two afterwards" has perennially been invoked to put children to bed early (although only 10 per cent of the survey sample believed it to be true).
Young ladies proverbially make sure they have their "beauty sleep" — the statement "a good night's sleep improves one's appearance" was endorsed by over two-thirds of the sample.
Similarly, the course of improvement from infectious illnesses accompanied by fever has been commonly held to be intimately connected with sleeping, so that a fever typically "breaks" during the night, while the temperature reaches a maximal high, and then as it reverts to near-normal the patient falls into a deep restorative sleep.
The common-sense view of sleep is that it is good for you, providing an opportunity for recovery from fatigue, is essential for growth, and crucial in cure from illness.
Coexisting with this view of sleep as a benign restorative has been a certain apprehensiveness about it.
We are obviously vulnerable during sleep.
This is primarily a physical vulnerability to enemies, both animal and human, because of our obliviousness of our surroundings and the confused, inert state we can be in when we first wake up.
The vampire legend, for example, gains much of its power from the helplessness of the sleeping victim.
A collective resolution of this sort of worry was at one time to employ someone to patrol the streets all night, calling out "Three o'clock and all's well!" or whatever, at regular intervals, providing reassurance to the sleeping citizens in their beds and even more so to any insomniacs.
Second, our apprehension is aroused by the fact that during sleep we seem to lose control of our minds.
Consciousness during wakefulness in a sane person is pretty well ordered and familiar.
The happy impression (perhaps totally illusory) that we have when awake that we are somehow in control of our mental processes deserts us when we are dreaming.
On the contrary, while we are asleep our consciousness seems to happen to us, rather than being under our control.
This is particularly disturbing  for people who subscribe to the Christian view that sinful thoughts are as wicked as the corresponding deeds, since we cannot prevent ourselves sometimes from dreaming of performing venial if not mortal sins.
In order to understand what is "obvious" about sleep and dreaming it is necessary to examine some of the conventional ideological baggage which most Westerners carry about with them, and its historical origins.
In addition, it will be useful to examine the idea that pre-literate societies, either in antiquity or those existing in the contemporary world, have more (or more far-fetched) mystical ideas about dreaming than our own.
DREAMING IN ANTIQUITY
Pre-scientific thinking about sleep and dreaming is often said to have revolved around the two notions of the soul leaving the body during sleep, or of the body being visited by spirits — gods and demons offering revelations and glimpses into the future, or wandering nightmares.
In classical times in Europe and the Middle East dreams were often written about as portents or as guides for action.
The Assyrian poem The Epic of Gilgamesh is regularly punctuated by dreams, both of the hero and his great friend Enkidu.
They foretell events, providing a sort of rationale for the extraordinary exploits, the failures and the tragedy of Gilgamesh.
The poem dates from the third millennium BC, and is a eulogistic account of the life of King Gilgamesh of Uruk in Mesopotamia.
It clearly ranks as the first written literature of any consequence.
It is also remarkable for its universality and its enduring appeal after five millennia.
(The tablets on which it was recorded were discovered in the mid nineteenth century, and their decipherment was only largely completed by the end of that century).
It starts: "O Gilgamesh, Lord of Kullab, great is thy praise.
This was the man to whom all things were known; this was the king who knew the countries of the world.
He was wise, he saw mysteries and knew secret things, he brought us a tale of the days before the flood.
He went on a long journey, was weary, worn-out with labour, and returning engraved on a stone the whole story."
N. K. Sanders's summary of the plot of the epic sets the scene: When the story begins he is in mature manhood, and superior to all  other men in beauty and strength and the unsatisfied cravings of his half-divine nature, for which he can find no worthy match in love or in war; while his daemonic energy is wearing his subjects out.
They are forced to call in the help of the gods, and the first episode describes how they provide a companion and foil.
This was Enkidu, the "natural man" , reared with wild animals, and as swift as the gazelle.
In time Enkidu was seduced by a harlot from the city, and with loss of innocence an irrevocable step was taken towards taming the wild man.
The animals now rejected him, and he was led on by stages; learning to wear clothes, eat human food, herd sheep, and make war on the wolf and lion, until at length he reached the great civilized city of Utuk.
Enkidu's arrival at Gilgamesh's court was announced to Gilgamesh by two dreams.
In the first Enkidu was symbolized by a meteor falling from heaven, whose attraction to Gilgamesh was mysteriously "like the love of a woman" , and which, when shown to his mother she pronounced it his brother.
In his second dream he found an axe on the streets of his city.
Again, he was deeply drawn to it, he loved it like a woman and wore it at his side.
His mother Ninsun, a minor goddess, interpreted both these dreams for him, identifying the meteor and the axe as the new friend he was about to make.
Gilgamesh and Enkidu became inseparable companions.
When Gilgamesh later dreamt that Enlil, the father of the gods, had decreed his destiny, it was Enkidu who interpreted for him, explaining that it indicated his certain mortality as well as the gifts of unexampled supremacy over the people and victory in battle.
When the two embarked on a mission against the giant Humbaba they both had dreams highly significant to their project.
These were apparently induced, or incubated, by Gilgamesh, who dug a well, went up to the mountain and poured out a fine meal on the ground before saying, "O mountain, dwelling of the gods, bring me a favourable dream" .
Encouraged by their interpretations of each others' dreams they set off against Humbaba to cut down his cedar forests.
As well as killing Humbaba they also slaughtered a semi-divine bull, the Bull of Heaven, which belonged to Ishtar the Queen of heaven and patroness of Uruk.
Enkidu now dreamt that they had offended the gods so deeply that one of them must die, and he promptly declined  into a fatal illness.
During his illness he dreamt of the after-life, where kings, rulers and princes were reduced from their high station to fetching and carrying as servants, and only the high priests, gods and one or two favoured dead kings were allowed to preserve their earthly privileges.
After Enkidu's death Gilgamesh wandered far and wide in his grief encountering among others the proverbial survivor of the great flood, Utnapishtim, who told him how he had been warned in a dream by a god of the imminent deluge, and instructed to build a great boat into which he was to take the seed of all living creatures.
Because of his obedience he had been granted the gift of eternal life.
Gilgamesh went on to search for the secret of immortality and according to the legend he almost succeeded.
Gilgamesh is not reported as having any significant dreams after Enkidu's death, and despite his continuing efforts to penetrate the mysteries it becomes increasingly apparent that his powers have waned and the gods have turned against him.
As a test of his strength Utnapishtim challenged him to stay awake for six days and seven nights — "But while Gilgamesh sat there resting on his haunches, a mist of sleep like soft wool teased from the fleece drifted over him, and Utnapishtim said to his wife," Look at him now, the strong man who would have everlasting life, even now the mists of sleep are drifting over him. "" 
Despite his human limitations he managed to retrieve the underwater thorn which would give immortality, although it was stolen from him on his journey back to Uruk by a serpent.
The epic ends with his death in his own city, which he was largely responsible for building.
"This too was the work of Gilgamesh, the king, who knew the countries of the world.
He was wise, he saw mysteries and knew secret things, he brought us a tale of the days before the flood.
He went on a long journey, was weary worn out with labour, and returning engraved on a stone the whole story."
It is impossible to do justice to the beauty of the poem in such a brief account.
As Sanders says, it is a mixture of pure adventure, of morality and of tragedy, with Gilgamesh the first tragic hero of whom anything  is known.
It is clear that even five thousand years ago in Mesopotamia people had achieved a degree of subtlety of belief that defies analysis into one or two dogmas.
The recognition and acceptance of the mysteries of mortality, earthly hubris, privilege and their futility were carried through two thousand years, as this epic was copied and repeated in different versions.
The role of dreaming in all this was to provide a channel of communication for the gods to inform and warn those few mortals sufficiently significant to attract their attention, at critical moments in their lives.
Presumably most people's dreams were not interpreted as being messages from the deities, as even Gilgamesh was only favoured with two or three of these in his lifetime.
In some societies the practical importance of dreams as portents of the future and as phenomena with mysterious healing properties was not only recognized but institutions were set up to exploit the fact.
In order to achieve both a suitable dream and an explanation of its meaning it would be necessary to travel to an oracle.
There, one would sleep on a special bed (from the sound of it, usually especially uncomfortable), and any dreams reported would be interpreted.
This process of inducing dreaming is called incubation.
It was practised in ancient Egypt and in Greece, and for ordinary people these special dreams were relied on for their curative powers more than their predictive value.
J. G. Frazer in his monumental work on folklore in the Old Testament maintained that the belief that the gods revealed themselves and declared their will to mankind in dreams was widespread in antiquity; and accordingly people resorted to temples and other sacred spots for the purpose of sleeping there and holding converse with the higher powers in visions of the night, for they naturally supposed that the deities or the deified spirits of the dead would be most likely to manifest themselves in places specially dedicated to their worship.
Frazer describes the process of consulting the oracle at the sanctuary dedicated to the soothsayer Ampiaraus, at Oropus, Attica.
Patients paid some money, and brought a sacrificial animal (the skin and shoulder of which would be kept subsequently by the priests), and slept in male or female dormitories on the hides of their freshly killed sacrificial rams.
If a cure was achieved then patients were permitted to  drop gold or silver coins into the sacred spring.
Similarly, at the Aesculapian sanctuary near Epidaurus, dormitories were provided for pilgrims seeking cures.
Those who were cured after their night at the sanctuary were permitted to record their dreams and commemorate their recoveries on votive tablets, some of which have survived to this day.
Interpretations were not offered by these priests — rather, the dreams themselves were thought to be curative.
Is there much difference between this sort of arrangement and that prevailing at Lourdes today?
Priests have always been regarded as healers of the mind, and even their modern equivalents in the psychoanalytic movement are similarly preoccupied with the dreams of their patients.
J. G. Frazer further suggests that the story of Jacob's dream (which was deemed so extremely significant that the spot on which it took place was henceforth sanctified in the Jewish religion) "was probably told to explain the immemorial sanctity of Bethel, which may well have been revered by the aboriginal inhabitants of Canaan long before the Hebrews invaded and conquered the land" .
In this case the dream is used as a political device — not consistent with the idea of credulous primitives believing in the literal truth of supernatural explanations.
At least the politicians who told the story can hardly have believed it, and it seems unlikely that people swallowed whole everything that they were told by their masters in antiquity, any more than they do now.
The Assassins, a Muslim sect founded in the eleventh century, were reputed to reward their devotees with visions of heaven by the use of hashish (from which they were widely assumed to derive their name).
According to Marco Polo's account the sect's leader (the "Old Man of the Mountain" )
…used a special "Paradise" constructed in a secluded valley.
Into this Garden of Earthly Delights the selected trainee Assassins were carried while unconscious with drugs [ "assassin" is derived from hashashin — "hashish-eaters" ].
When they came round in the valley, they were entertained with every delightful variant of wine, women and song promised in the holy scriptures to those who would go to Paradise.
Drugged again, they regained consciousness outside the valley in anguish that it had all been a dream.
No, they were told, all this will be yours again on completion of your mission…
The point of all this was of course to reinforce the belief that the after-life was a paradise, even if only achievable with certainty through death in battle, and thus to improve the combativeness of the assassins.
This well-known story from Marco Polo's account dates from two hundred years after the sect had been crushed.
Islamic scholars writing in English have come to regard the story as being apocryphal.
Even the derivation of the name "assassin" from "hashish" is in doubt, according to Bernard Lewis's authoritative historical account of the sect.
The term "hashshash" does refer to users of cannabis in Arabic, but "hashish" and "hashishi" referred generically to herbage, and only later specifically meant cannabis.
In addition Lewis argues that since the name "hashishi" is local to Syria as a term of popular abuse, it was "in all probability the name that gave rise to the story, rather than the reverse" .
Cannabis was widely used in the Middle East during this period, and it seems unlikely that the practice in itself would seem remarkable enough to cause any comment among Arabs.
The sect did use assassination as a highly effective weapon, however, against other Persian groups.
Their reputation for fanaticism was widespread among the Crusaders, and
in 1195, when King Richard Coeur de Lion was at Chinon, no less than fifteen so-called Assassins were apprehended, and confessed that they had been sent by the King of France to kill him.
Before long, such charges became frequent…[but]there can be little doubt that these charges are baseless.
The chiefs of the Assassins, in Persia or in Syria, had no interest in the plots and intrigues of Western Europe; the European needed no help outside in the various arts of murder.
There is no evidence that the Ismaili Assassins ever made contact with the Crusaders in the relatively short history of the sect.
(They were subdued by the Mongols, who destroyed their castles in 1256.)
Speculation about whether the Assassin troops believed that their experiences in the Alamut gardens fitted out as Paradise were really a dream, or whether the gardens' compliant slaves were all too real in the flesh is thus academic.
This story is apparently an invention of foreigners, and does not appear in the Arab texts.
It seems that fanaticism does not need to be fuelled by credulity, at least about dreaming.
Indeed the accounts of the feuds between Middle Eastern  factions in the eleventh and twelfth century read much like the strife between the militias in modern Beirut, and there is no suggestion that these present-day protagonists have particularly mystical views about dreaming.
The conventional Western European view at that time was of sleep as a pleasurable indulgence, like sex, providing a natural avenue for the temptations of the devil.
Nocturnal emissions, or "wet dreams" were an obvious result of demonic intervention.
The Christian requirements for chastity in the clergy, and the prohibition against masturbation paradoxically created the conditions most likely to promote these "pollutions" .
St Ambrose accordingly wrote a prayer to guard against them: Procul recedent somnia Let dreams and nocturnal Et noctium phantasmata Phantasies depart far away, Hostemque nostrum comprime, And suppress our enemy Ne polluantur corpora.
Lest our bodies be polluted.
St Augustine similarly asked God to keep him in a "chaste desire" during sleep, and protect him from dreams which, "owing to animal images" , might lead him "to pollution" .
Although two of the fathers (Tertullian and St Augustine) granted dispensations for these nocturnal pollutions, as they were called, dreams were still regarded with deep suspicion.
Dream interpretation had been widely practised in the ancient world, but since Christian theologians could establish no way of telling the difference between divine and demonic dreams, divination of any sort was pronounced heretical.
The clerical domination of Western thought during the Dark and Middle Ages resulted in a relative neglect of this subject until the sixteenth century, when the rather trivializing "dream-books" of Artemidorus were rediscovered.
Can we even construe Freudian theory as a nineteenth century articulation of these ideas about possession?
The id, according to Freud, is uncontainable throughout the night, and instinctual pressure periodically forces unacceptable and deeply disturbing ideas into consciousness.
Instead of prayers to protect us from these sources of guilt, shame and terror Freud suggested that dreams took over, transforming the Gothic horrors into cryptic symbols only interpretable by psycho-analysts, the new priests of nineteenth century rationalism.
In England, until the sixteenth century, it was unremarkable to speak of visitations from incubi and succubi — evil spirits (male and female, respectively) which were thought to descend on sleepers, seducing them and perverting them to the ways of the devil.
In particular, witches were presumed to consort with incubi.
But was this a belief that encompassed the "normal" dreams that everybody experiences?
Pre-scientific thinking in Europe is relatively well preserved in the writings of its poets.
The dream-poems of Chaucer and the French medieval poets before him make clear that it did not.
There is no hint that dreaming, in this context, was any more than a poetic device, with no connotation of the supernatural simply from the fact that it was a dream.
A consideration of two dreams in Shakespeare's plays takes us to a similar conclusion.
These are the Duke of Clarence's nightmare in Richard III, anticipating his own death, and Caesar's wife's dream in Julius Caesar.
Both of them seem to involve precognition, predicting dramatic changes in the destiny of great men.
The simplest dramatic use of the dream relies on its being ignored or misinterpreted.
The audience is thus given a cue as to what is likely to happen, and dramatic tension is created by the characters' knowing as much as they do, but carrying on regardless.
At a more subtle level, in both Richard III and Julius Caesar there is a sense in which disregarding portents is part of a more general characterization — of individuals who have taken their destiny into their own hands, or think they have, in contrast to those who consciously submit to their fate.6 However the context in which dreaming is used in the plot has to be constructed to suit the play — the ideology of the culture in which it is set must condition the characters' responses.
It is here that we can gain some insight into the assumptions that Shakespeare and his audience are making about beliefs in antiquity, compared to more modern medieval beliefs — Richard III reigned a mere century before the play was first performed.
In Julius Caesar Calphurnia dreamed she saw Caesar's statue which "like a fountain with an hundred spouts, did run pure blood; and many lusty Romans came smiling and did bathe their hands in it" .
Portents in plenty are also reported — "a tempest dripping fire" (St Elmo's fire?), a lion walking sulkily through the city, the bird of night hooting and shrieking at noon-day and of course the soothsayer's warning to "Beware the Ides of March" .
In this context the portentous dream is  used as another example of the superstition of antiquity, rather than a statement of current belief.
Incidentally, a character called Artemidorus appears in the play.
He is described as a teacher of rhetoric, but this was probably not a slightly anachronistic reference to Artemidorus of Daldis, whose dream-books were becoming popularly available in print on the Continent for the first time in the second half of the sixteenth century in Latin and Greek.
The play is taken from Plutarch's Lives, in which Artemidorus is described as being born in the Isle of Guidos, and a Doctor of Rhetoric in the Greek tongue.
Artemidorus of Daldis was not born at the time.
The first English translation of Artemidorus's Oneirocritica, by Robert Woods, was published in 1606.
It must have been a popular book as it had gone to five editions by 1656, and twenty-four editions by 1744.
However, when the play was written (in 1601) Shakespeare may well have been familiar with the Latin or Greek version, but his audience in the main would not.
In Richard III Clarence has every reason to fear for his life, since he has been imprisoned in the Tower of London.
The reason he offered to Richard for his incarceration was that the King was "hearkening after prophecies and dreams…and suchlike toys as these had moved His Highness to commit me now" .
Here belief in such portents is presented as being highly suspect, and possibly an excuse for more sordid political ends.
Clearly Shakespeare's audience was expected to take a sceptical view of dreams as portents although attributing such beliefs to the ancients.
Clarence's dream is more closely described than any in Julius Caesar, and is a highly believable nightmare of drowning.
Clarence has escaped from the Tower, and is crossing the Channel with his brother Gloucester (later to become Richard III).
Walking together on the ship's deck, Gloucester stumbles, and Clarence, in trying to steady him, is knocked overboard.
A graphic description of drowning is followed by his translation to the "kingdom of perpetual night" .
The two abrupt changes in plot — from walking on the deck to the water, and from the water to the next world — are typical of the "scene-shift" phenomenon of dreaming.
Even more convincing as an account of a real dream is the idea that Gloucester was somehow responsible for his death — but only accidentally.
This is a truly classic example of dreamwork as described by the psychoanalysts.
The latent thought is  the notion that Gloucester may be plotting to murder him — an idea too horrifying to contemplate.
The dreamwork process thus thinly disguises it, making Gloucester kill him all the same, but accidentally.
 "Gloucester will kill me by accident, though he doesn't want to." 
It is my contention here that neither Shakespeare nor his audience believed that dreams predicted the future, although they were certainly prepared to entertain the idea.
The interest and subtlety of the plays rely on a considerable degree of scepticism of the infallibility of dreams as guides for the future.
The Grimm brothers, according to Donald Ward in his tome, The German Legends of the Brothers Grimm, described the nightmare as being a traveller in physical form.
Some shepherds who observed one regularly using a boat to cross a river, and removed the boat, reduced the nightmare to wailing pitifully and threatening them, demanding the return of the boat.
At night they like to ride horses, and in the morning one can see that they have done so because the horses are exhausted…
They like to tangle their victims' hair into elflocks, or as they are also called, tangle locks, or mare's braids.
They do this by sucking on the hair and twisting it.
Were we really expected to believe this?
The account hovers on the brink of farce, and must surely have been intended as a spine-chiller more analogous to a modern horror film than a literal description of something which was to be believed in.
We are invited to thrill to the idea of travelling nightmares, but the essentially humorous style informs us that it isn't to be taken entirely seriously.
The upshot of this foray into the literature on beliefs in antiquity seems to be that there was a great deal of credulity and some scepticism, as well as some wonderfully entertaining stories.
Much of what went on seems unremarkable in terms of modern beliefs and practices — either in the fringe cults and the established Churches or in modern psychotherapy.
As today, people liked the idea of weird beliefs about dreaming, but imputed them to foreigners (such as the Assassins) or the ancients.
MODERN BELIEFS ABOUT DREAMING
The beginnings of modern thought about sleep and dreaming can be traced to the late eighteenth century, the time of the Enlightenment.
Scientific writings were read widely by educated people, unlike today, when we are divided into two cultures by the inaccessibility of science to non-experts.
Erasmus Darwin published his Zoonomia in 1794, which was partly a medical textbook, partly a treatise in biology.
Together with his other writings, its profound influence on the Romantic poets illustrates the depth to which scientific ideas, which today might remain obscure, could swiftly penetrate literary and artistic thinking.
His chapters on "Sleep" and "Reverie" , for instance, informed Coleridge's development of ideas about dramatic illusion, and his evolutionist ideas found expression in Wordsworth's Ode "Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of early Childhood" : Though inland far we be, Our souls have sight of that immortal sea Which brought us hither.
Darwin's analysis of the state of consciousness during dreaming is still well worth reading.
It was of course self-evident to him as a rationalist that dreams are a product of the imagination, rather than any mystical intervention.
The idea prevalent during the 19605 that lack of dreaming might cause madness is anticipated by two hundred years in his writing.
Darwin's view was that dreams prevented delirium by allowing trains of ideas to continue in the absence of sensory input — if they were to be suspended in sleep like the voluntary motions,(which are exerted only by intervals during our waking hours) an accumulation of sensorial power would follow; and on our awakening a delirium would supervene, since these ideas caused by sensation would be produced with such energy, that we should mistake the trains of imagination for ideas excited by irritation; as perpetually happens to people debilitated by fevers on their first wakening; for in these fevers with debility the general quantity of irritation being diminished, that of sensation is increased.
This argument differs from the more modern notion, that dreaming is involved in the resolution of conflicts, but similarly ascribes an importance to dreams in preserving sanity.
Central to his description of dreaming is the suspension of volition, "and in respect to the mind, we never exercise our reason or recollection in dreams; we may sometimes seem distracted between contending  passions, but we never compare their objects, or deliberate about the acquisition of these objects…" 
This observation, that we remain uncritical observers in dreaming, forms an important part of some recent theorizing about dreaming by the psychophysiologist Allan Rechtschaffen, who has described dreams as being "isolated" and even "unimaginative" in the sense that we cannot imagine something else during the action of a dream.
(This theory is more fully described in Chapter 5.)
Darwin's work shows how little scientific thinking about dreaming has changed over two centuries, and its popularity and deep influence during his own lifetime ensured that these rationalist ideas became an accepted part of literary as well as scientific ideology.
However, what can we say with confidence about the beliefs of ordinary people, either in the nineteenth or even in the late twentieth century?
One approach is to consider the usage of words themselves.
A very common modern form of expression is the "dream" thing — for instance, a dream kitchen or a dream holiday — implying that dreams are simple wish-fulfilments.
This usage is now so prevalent that it hardly conveys anything more than the best that could be imagined.
When Emerson wrote "The search after the great is the dream of youth" , in 1847, this was a metaphor with considerable impact.
The Oxford English Dictionary gives no previous examples of this usage, while twentieth-century examples abound, from "I dream of Jeanie with the light brown hair" , and "I'm dreaming of a white Christmas" , to Martin Luther King's dream of a just and non-racist society, the American Dream itself, and every other advertisement for kitchens and holidays to the sun.
We can only speculate on whether this is another example of the pervasive influence of psychoanalytic thinking in our culture.
Over the last thirty years the achievements of physiologists and psychologists in studying dreaming have received a good deal of attention in the media, much of it sensationalist, so one might expect some of this information to have percolated through to become common knowledge.
While much remains to be explained about dreaming, a number of findings have been made which are by now uncontentious among scientists.
Three of the questions in the Hull survey were designed to assess how well known these ideas have become.
The statements with which respondents were invited to entirely agree, agree with qualification, or disagree, were:(12) Dreams only occur in the few moments before you wake up.
(14) Dreaming sleep is commonly accompanied by flaccid (relaxed) paralysis.
(15) Preventing people from dreaming drives them mad.
We know from experimental evidence that dreams proceed as it were in "real" time, and are just as long as they seem.
The flaccid paralysis of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, usually accompanied by dreaming, is also well established.
Depriving people of dreaming (rapid eye movement) sleep has indeed been achieved in sleep laboratories.
It does not drive them mad any more than depriving them of any other sort of sleep, although one early report did suggest the reverse, and was highly publicized.
The responses of those surveyed revealed some ignorance concerning the first question.
Of 149 respondents, 18 subjects agreed firmly with the statement that "Dreams occur only in the few moments before you wake up" , and a further 23 thought this was perhaps true.
The second question, asking whether dreaming is accompanied by flaccid paralysis, was agreed with by a surprising 48 respondents, although these people did not show themselves to be well informed about the other questions.
There was no general consistency in response to this group of questions, which may have indicated that subjects responding correctly did so out of knowledge of the scientific findings.
The proportion (33 out of 149) agreeing with the statement that preventing dreams can cause madness suggests, however, that some of the publicity may have got through, although this whole issue may be confounded with ideas of brainwashing and the effects of total sleep loss.
Modern beliefs, one might think, ought to be in the rationalist mould of the Enlightenment, but little or nothing is taught about the psychology of consciousness in schools, except in terms of religious studies.
Religion has had a decisive influence on thinking about dreaming, and it is achieving a revival in many parts of the world.
In particular, fundamentalism, in both East and West, is becoming increasingly popular.
The United Kingdom has been spared so far, but while the majority of the population are religiously inactive in terms of church-going, most of them would call themselves Christians, and their spiritual beliefs have been formed by Christian teaching.
The established Church of England shares with other Christian Churches in  upholding the claims of the New Testament, while keeping quiet about some Old Testament stories.
Religious education in schools is of course compulsory in the United Kingdom.
From my thirteen-year-old daughter's account it is still as uncritical as it was in my own schooldays.
Looking at her school books on the Bible it is clear that there may be some doubt about the credibility of the revelations of the New Testament involving visions of God or angels, or dreams of them.
The interpretations offered in Horton's Stories and The Ladybird New Testament deal with these issues very similarly.
The first two examples quoted here are examples of supernatural manifestations being avoided altogether.
The Authorized Version of the Magi's dream, recounted in St Matthew, chapter 2, verse 12: And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return to Herod, they departed into their own country another way.
The Ladybird New Testament version simply glosses over the mechanism of how God communicated with the Magi: Then God warned the wise men not to trust King Herod.
So they did not tell him where Jesus was, but made their way home without going back to Jerusalem.
Joseph's complacency about his future wife's pregnancy was of course the result of the revelation of the true Father of the future infant.
St Matthew, Chapter I, gives the only plain account of how this was achieved: 18 Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost.
19 Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a publick example, was minded to put her away privily.
20 But while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost.
21 And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins.
24 Then Joseph being bed from sleep did as the angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took unto him his wife.
The children's version says nothing about Joseph's views on his wife's mysterious pregnancy.
Second, there is a tendency to opt for dreams rather than direct manifestations or visions when there is any room for doubt in the text of the Gospel.
Two of the New Testament revelations are ambiguously reported.
These are Peter's vision of all the beasts of the field which the Lord told him to eat, even if they were unclean, and Paul's vision of a Macedonian.
It is interesting to see what line is taken with modern children when there is an opportunity to opt either for direct visions or sleeping dreams.
In both cases the authors opt for dreams.
The account of Paul's dream about the Macedonian appears in Acts, Chapter 16: 8 And they passing by Mysia came down to Troas.
9 And a vision appeared to Paul in the night; There stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us.
10 And after he had seen the vision, immediately we endeavoured to go into Macedonia, assuredly"gathering that the Lord had called us for to preach the gospel unto them.
Horton's Stories of the Early Church: That night Paul had a strange dream.
In it he saw a man from Macedonia calling to him.
 "Come over to Macedonia," he said, "and help us." 
Paul knew that this was a sign from God.
He and his friends set off right away across the sea.
Peter's dream of unclean animals is recorded in Acts, Chapter 10: 9 On the morrow, as they went on their journey, and drew nigh unto the city, Peter went up upon the housetop to pray about the sixth hour.
10 And he became very hungry, and would have eaten: but while they made ready, he fell into a trance.
11 And saw heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending unto him, as if had been a great sheet knit at the four comers, and let down to the earth.
Horton's Stories of the Early Church: Peter was on the roof of his house, praying to God.
He was very hungry and fell asleep.
Then he had a strange dream.
He saw what seemed to be a great sheet coming down from heaven.
In it were all kinds of animals and birds.
Then a voice spoke to him: "Get up, Peter!
Kill and eat."
 "I have never eaten anything that is common or unclean," said Peter.
[The Jewish law did not allow Jews to eat the flesh of some animals, such as the pig, which were called unclean.]
Again Peter heard the voice, telling him that he must not call things unclean that God had made.
Three times this was done, and then the sheet was drawn up to heaven again.
Peter did not know what this dream meant.
In The Ladybird New Testament the story is similarly altered to include a dream rather than a vision: One day Peter went up on the roof of the house where he was staying in Joppa to pray.
While he was there, God gave him a special dream.
Peter saw a big sheet coming down from the sky, full of animals…
God told him that everything he had made was good, and again invited him to eat…
At last Peter woke up.
He was wondering what his dream meant when some men called to see him.
These Bible stories must be one of the few sources of information about dreaming made available during the course of our children's education.
Not only are biblical accounts of supernatural visitations during dreams and dreams foretelling the future repeated without comment, even where ambiguity exists, the authors writing for children insert more accounts of dreams rather than asserting that visitations happened to people who were awake.
The Hull survey included questions on whether spirits visited the body to cause dreams, whether dreams could foretell the future, whether nightmares could be caused by evil spirits, and whether the soul could leave the body during sleep.
In addition, they asked whether the dreams reported in the New Testament could be literally true.
Over half the respondents acknowledged that dreams could foretell the future, and among those who believed in the literal truth of the   accounts of dreaming in the New Testament, this proportion was much higher.
Very few people indeed agreed that nightmares could be caused by demons, or that the soul leaves the body during sleep.
Only two of the sixteen believers in the Bible accounts agreed that spirits could visit us during dreams although it is crucial to the sense of these accounts that God did make Himself known to individuals during dreams, and actually visited them in their dreams.
This evidence demonstrates how even well-educated people can hold mutually contradictory beliefs (a proposition which social psychologists would find quite uncontroversial).
In this context it becomes obvious that we must be careful not to oversimplify the ideology of distant cultures, either in time or space, simply for our own ease of comprehension.
A recent anthropological study of Zulu people in South Africa"reported: Ancestral spirits are believed to visit their descendants in their sleep and through dreams make their wishes known.
Sleep is ubuthongo, and an ancestral spirit is ithongo.
The etymology here could well indicate the contact during sleep between the living and the dead, in which case sleep may be regarded as a miniature death that takes a person away from the conscious life of the day.
In imputing this degree of credulity to people who live far away in foreign cultures, is the anthropologist liable to be careless in the way he asks his questions?
The official religion in the UK — Christianity — crucially invokes supernatural dreams; and yet the most devout Anglican would be most unlikely to interpret one of his own dreams as being  a message from a deity.
According to my sample of Hull University students, the dreams of Joseph, the Magi, and so on may have been literally true (according to over half of those questioned), but it seems that it would be naive to conclude that they really believe that communications of this sort are still "possible" — that is, presumably they happened in the Bible by some unique divine intervention which will never be repeated.
A surprising contrast to what any anthropologist would have to report about the religious beliefs of modem Westerners is Turnbull's authoritative and intimate account is of the lives of pygmies in the forests of the Congo — containing no references to dreaming at all, and very little evidence of pygmy mysticism.
Rather than modem Western beliefs being less mystic than those in antiquity, or in underdeveloped communities, they seem equally if not more so than some.
It could be argued that the very incomprehensibility of the modern world has made us even more credulous.
Many of the quite commonplace products of modern technology might as well be magic, for all that any normal person could be expected to understand how they work.
(b) Interpretation of dreams
LAY INTERPRETATIONS
A despot might well take his or her dreams seriously, just as he would be deeply interested in any other of his own bodily functions, as would his courtiers.
A Pharaoh or a modem dictator would share the conundrum that though apparently so similar to their subjects, with their same mortal limitations, they somehow have acquired the privilege of uniquely determining their country's future, and deciding on matters of life and death perhaps every day.
The fact that soothsayers were employed by rulers from the Pharaohs to Hitler is perhaps unsurprising.
The advice given by these advisers would properly have been guided by expediency as much as by any rules of interpretation and as such cannot be taken to represent a body of thought about dreaming.
In modern life astrology seems in any case to have taken over from dream interpretation as the soothsayer's preferred technique.
Fragments of papyri from the second millennium BC seem to be the first writings to deal exclusively with the subject matter of dreams, mainly concerning themselves with incest and bestiality with various  animals.
The only interpretations were that "That is bad" or "That is good" , with no further elaboration.
Assyrian cuneiform texts have also been found which give interpretations of dream-topics, many of which, again, are taboo behaviours — eating the flesh of one's penis, killing brothers or sons, eating faeces.
According to Becker many more, however, are more mundane: To meet a horse was to obtain a saviour.
Monkeys, pigs, foxes, mice, cats, birds, snakes and dogs were favourable, indicating posterity and prosperity.
But he-goats and sometimes rams were bad omens.
Long commentaries were devoted to dreams of flying, even at this period.
All, with a few exceptions, signified danger and often death…
The problems of physiological life are not forgotten.
Importance is given to teeth-grinding, interpreted in a negative way, together with speaking, groaning or snoring while dreaming.
The most important dream-book of this sort was the compilation made by Artemidorus in the second century AD, taking material from Middle Eastern, Greek and North African sources.
His was not entirely a list of subjects and their meanings, and he preferred to make the interpretation by considering a sequence of dreams, and even the personality and circumstances of the dreamer.
Quite often, the dream was interpreted as an allegory for what was about to happen to the dreamer.
The complexity of some of the interpretations offered in his books, and the attention paid to the dreamer has invited comparisons between his methods and those of Freud, centuries later.
According to Charles Rycroft, Artemidorus required to know at least six facts about a dream before it could be interpreted — "Whether the events depicted in the dream were plausible or bizarre; whether they were approximately interconnected; whether they were customary for the dreamer; what events prior to the dream could have influenced it; and the dreamer's name and occupation" .
His books were not widely circulated and in one of the last two which were dedicated to his son (and unpublished) was the assertion that it contains instances "that will make you a better interpreter of dreams than all, or at least inferior to none; but, if published, they will show you know no more than the rest" — a sentiment which T. R. Glover rather pithily describes as suggesting science declining into profession.
While interpretations had  previously derived their credibility from divine revelations of one sort or another, from this time on, in Europe, dream interpretations drew their authority primarily from their antiquity.
A well-developed systematization of dream interpretation apparently existed in China, but was never taken entirely seriously, or at least, being incorporated into the civil service, lacked the glamour of antiquity or divine revelation.
Joseph Needham's only indexed reference to dreaming in ancient China is tantalizingly brief: Oneiromancy, or prognostication by dreams, was also practised in China, as in most ancient civilisations, though it can hardly be said to have taken a very important place there.
The Chou Li says that the interpretation of dreams was in the department of the Grand Augur (Ta Pu), and mentions a special expert of lower grade (Chan Meng) who specialised in it.
Here again the chief book was late, the Meng Chan I Chih of Chhen Shih-Yuan, published in + 1562 (Ming).
How far certain aspects of Chinese dream-interpretation might be considered, as Chinese themselves are sometimes inclined to think, anticipations of Freudian psychology, would be a subject worth investigating.
The invention of printing in Europe in the sixteenth century soon brought with it a number of books offering dream-interpretations for ordinary people.
These books typically claimed to be the distillation of wisdom handed down from Arab sages through the centuries, and they all drew heavily on Artemidorus's work.
They took the form of dictionaries, with lists of subject-matters and their associated meanings.
As Raymond de Becker points out, they could have been used as gospel by the naive, or turned into parlour games by sceptics.
The Palais du Prince du Sommeil, written by Celestin de Mirbel in 1667 actually advises in his preface that, "The favours of the strictest ladies will be wholly won for you, at the moment when you become the sympathetic interpreter of their dreams" — certainly a pragmatic reason for buying his dream-book.
The modem newspaper horoscope has largely taken over from dream-books, although they are still published, and still draw largely on the works of Artemidorus (or claim to).
The truth is, few people believe that revelations are going to be made to them in dreams — and even on the rare occasions that an individual really felt a dream was of  overwhelming "significance" , the so-called dream-books could only taken in the most gullible.
Nevertheless, we still tell each other our dreams and look them up in these absurd books, and still read our horoscopes — just for fun.
PSYCHOANALYTIC DREAM INTERPRETATION: THE LAY VIEW
Psychoanalytic thinking has had a deep influence on psychiatry and psychology in the twentieth century, but this has been by no means decisive, and its increasingly fragmented theories have been subjected to continuous criticism.
Its Influence on Western culture has, however, been pervasive, particularly in literature, theatre and the cinema.
Its historical importance in the development of modern ideology has come from its unique claim to explain experience, however eccentrically.
That is to say, there was, at least in the first quarter of this century, no well-developed rationalist alternative to theology or a simplistic materialism to explain mental life.
Rejection of official religion drove people to the alternatives of magical or spiritualistic fringe cults and rationalism.
While psychoanalysis itself probably had little to do with the decline in accepted religious belief, its early popularizes only benefited from it.
As Geoffrey Gorer has remarked, their books for a lay public implied that psychoanalytic theory gave them an insight into matters of general concern of a depth and quality simply not available to the uninitiated, to people without qualifications.
The authority of medicine finally ousted Artemidorus's invocations of antiquity or the increasingly muted references to the supernatural by the clergy, in explaining life's ordinary ecstasies and tribulations.
The early splintering of the psychoanalytic movement and the independent developments by the neo-Freudians, such as Alfred Adler in the United States, undermined the coherence of Freud's original formulations.
To the outsider, psychoanalysis appears a pretty broad church, at least so far as dream interpretation is concerned.
The one idea that can be said to have made a firm impression from the psychoanalytic approach to dreaming is that these experiences come from within the mind, rather than from outside (although in the case of Jung's psychology even this is not clear).
Many dreams are so bizarre that they seem inexplicable and it follows that only a medically qualified expert could penetrate the machinations of the subconscious mind which produced them.
The second psychoanalytic message that  has come through to the public is its preoccupation with sex.
The idea that dream objects have sexual symbolism can, however, degenerate into a sort of post-Artemidorian dream-book formula, where anything elongated is a phallic symbol, anything with a hole a vaginal one.
This is the layman's view of psychoanalytic dream interpretation — how any more subtle understanding is achieved is obscure.
This obscurity has not detracted from the approach's popularity, and many widely held notions about psychology have originated in the cinema, in magazines or novels, based on interpretations of psychoanalytic thought.
(c) Conclusion
To sum up this chapter's survey of what people believe about sleep and dreaming — what seem to be the self-evident truths — it must be admitted that there is very little consensus.
Most people would probably agree that sleep was necessary and provided rest from exertion, and perhaps had some restorative function as well.
So far as dreaming is concerned, it seems that the most striking difference between modern Western culture and pre-scientific cultures is not any decrease in mysticism or Informal supernatural beliefs, but an explosion in the number of alternative explanations for dreaming.
The scientific explanation (to be developed In the rest of this book) seems to be just one, along with religious, medical or psychoanalytic and superstitious ones.
While recent scientific findings about sleep patterns receive regular exposure in the media in popular N science programmes and in magazines, there is little evidence from the results of the Hull survey that they have made any impression on the public mind.
Studying Sleep in the Laboratory
The story of sleep was revolutionized in the early 19605 by the systematization of the previously ad hoc methods for estimating sleep depth and quality, using EEG (brainwave) and other measures.
These new methods of recording and scoring sleep stages in human beings were based on the use of a piece of equipment available in most hospitals and many university departments of psychology — the clinical EEG machine, or electro-encephalograph, a device for detecting and recording the electrical activity of the brain.
The ready availability of recording devices contributed to the explosion of research into sleep and dreaming during the late 1960s.
Much of the evidence discussed in the next few chapters will rely on EEG and other electro-physiological information, and some understanding of the basis of these measures is essential to understanding how we know what we do about sleep.
The next few pages contain an explanation of the working of the EEG, written in a non-technical way.
It is hoped that the general reader will find this interesting as it certainly adds to the understanding of the fascinating discoveries described in the later chapters.
It is easiest to understand the modern methods for measuring electrical activity from the brain by looking at the development of these methods over the past hundred years or so.
The major electrical manifestations of cortical activity will be described, and some important issues will be clarified at a simple, accessible level which might otherwise remain impenetrable if dealt with in their modern context.
(a) Story of the EEG
The principles of electromagnetism had been established by the late eighteenth century, but it was not until the mid-nineteenth century that any sort of measurements could be made of the small currents produced by living tissue.
There were, however, one or two early attempts to investigate the relationships between electricity and living organisms during the eighteenth century, long before the technology existed to do so properly.
According to Grey Walter in his book The Living Brain "informal experiments on executed criminals showed that electric shocks caused muscles to contract and twitch, and Louis" caused an electric shock from a battery of Leyden jars to be administered to seven hundred Carthusian monks joined hand to hand, with prodigious effect".
The Leyden jar was simply a primitive condenser, capable of storing static electricity for short periods of time, and more refined experiments had to await the invention of reliable sources of electric current.
Electrical stimulation could produce dramatic effects, but the proper study of electro-physiology had to wait for some time until it was possible to record small electrical potentials.
The gold leaf electroscope, available early in the nineteenth century, was too insensitive to register the tiny changes in potential difference associated with nervous and muscular activity.
The first workable device for recording small potentials was the string galvanometer.
Although totally obsolete in today's laboratories, a description of this simple device is useful in making clear what is being recorded, and illustrating some of the problems which still confront modern sleep researchers.
Essentially the string galvanometer consisted of a coil of copper wire, connected at either end to two electrodes, and string hanging down within the coil to which was attached a small magnetized mirror.
A difference In electrical potential between the two electrodes would cause a current flow through the coil, creating a magnetic field within.
The mirror would then rotate in proportion to the strength of the current.
A light, shone on to the mirror and reflected on to a fairly distant surface, would provide an initial doubling in amplification of the movement of the mirror, and the farther the light was projected, the greater the subsequent amplification of any change in potential difference.
An improvement on this basic design  was to use a lightweight but rigid rotating rod on which to mount the magnet and mirror, and attach a coil spring at one end, so that once any change in potential difference had been registered the mirror would swing back to its original position.
One way of obtaining a permanent record, in the nineteenth century, was for one observer to watch the galvanometer mirror through a telescope and work a key with his finger that operated a signal pen on a smoked drum kymograph.
The magnitude of excursion of the mirror was read aloud by a second observer (watching the projected light) to an assistant who wrote on the drum next to the appropriate signal.
An apparently apocryphal account is of two Prussian medical officers, Fritsch and Hitzig, who In 1870 took advantage of the opportunity offered by the Franco-Prussian War to study the exposed brains of soldiers struck down on the battlefield."
What is certain is that they discovered that electrical stimulation of some parts of the cortex caused movements in the limbs on the opposite side of the body from the part of the brain that had been stimulated.
Animal experiments showed that these movements could be elicited repeatedly by stimulation at the same place.
It was now possible to map what we now know as the motor cortex (i.e. the part of the brain controlling muscle function) in terms of the musculature each section controlled.
The procedure, Incidentally, can and has been performed on patients undergoing brain surgery.
The surface of the brain is totally insensitive, and operations on the brain in humans commonly involve only a local anaesthetic.
The patient is conscious and can even report to the surgeon any experience he or she may be having as the operation progresses.
It was now obvious that with sufficient sensitive recording techniques it should be possible to map the parts of the brain responsible for perception — the sensory cortex — in a similar way.
This was the task that Richard Caton, working in Liverpool, set himself, using a Thomson reflecting galvanometer and Du Bois-Reymond's coated, non-polarizable electrodes.
Caton repeated some earlier experiments on the electro-physiology of nerve and muscle preparations, and then set about recording from the exposed surface of the brain.
In doing so he discovered that there were spontaneously generated potentials (the EEG) as well as showing that it was indeed possible to detect electrical brain responses to stimuli.
While he located the visual cortex in the  occiput, or rear of the head, using this technique, he was unable to find any location specifically responsive to sound stimulation.
The observation that there was spontaneous electrical activity at the surface of the cortex seemed relatively insignificant at the time, but it was the discovery of the electro-encephalogram.
Mary A. B. Brazier has described the work of Hans Berger as the triumph of a man working with equipment inadequate even by the standards of his day.
Like Caton, Berger attempted to record electrical responses to sensory stimuli in animals, although it seems that the work he did between 1902 and 1910 was, in general, unsuccessful.
It was not until 1924 that he turned to the measurement of human electrical potentials, and delayed publication until 1929, when the first recorded electro-encephalogram (of his young son) appeared in Archiv Forschung Psychiatrie.
Berger discovered the alpha rhythm, running at 10 cycles per second (Hertz, or Hz) and also discovered that it disappeared if the eyes were opened, with mental effort such as doing mental arithmetic with eyes closed, and with loud noises or painful stimuli.
Berger's work was disregarded by physiologists, partly because it was published in psychiatric journals, and also perhaps because of his reputation for eccentricity, seclusiveness and his longstanding belief in psychic phenomena such as telepathy.
Only after his work was replicated by Adrian and Matthews in Cambridge did he get the credit he deserved for having laid the foundations of human electro-encephalography.
Brazier's history of the EEG cannot be recommended too highly for readers wishing to read a full and authoritative account of the early days.
(b) Modem EEG techniques as applied in recording from sleeping subjects
THE MODERN ELECTRO-ENCEPHALOGRAM
The modern clinical EEG machine is a far cry from the simple galvanometer devices used by Berger and the other pioneers.
Entirely electronic amplifiers are arranged in banks, so that between eight and sixteen channels of EEG are transmitted to a bank of galvanometers.
The use of multiple recordings has allowed the development of a series of techniques for localizing sources of electrical activity within the cranium.
These have been clinically very useful, for instance in localizing sources of abnormal activity within the head, from tumours or foreign objects.
Generally, only one EEG channel is used in the sleep laboratory, but the other channels are used to record other sources of electrical activity, generated by movements of the eyes or from the neck muscles under the chin.
The differential amplifiers used in EEG machines use the difference between the voltages offered by the two inputs, which is normally less than 200 microvolts (millionths of a volt), and amplify this difference up to a voltage sufficient to drive the galvanometer pens — perhaps 0–5 volts.
In addition, there will be a selection of electronic high frequency filters, and of low frequency filters.
Modern EEGs work on the same principle as the sprung mirror galvanometer — i.e. they are capable of measuring very fast changes in potential difference between the electrodes, but are relatively insensitive to slow changes.
That is, after a shift in level of voltage difference between the electrodes has taken place, the output from the amplifier gradually returns to the midline.
The rate at which it does this is measured as a "time constant" — defined as the time it takes for the output to return 63 per cent of the way to baseline, after a shift in input voltage level.
The shorter the time constant the more attenuated slow activity will be.
To pursue the analogy with the sprung mirror galvanometer, the more powerful the spring, the faster the mirror will swing back to its original position.
SLEEP RECORDING MONTAGES
The definitive work, A Manual of Standardized Terminology, Techniques and Scoring System for Sleep Stages of Human Subjects, gives a detailed account of the internationally agreed system of recording of sleep stages.
EEG (electro-encephalographic, or brainwave), EOG (electro-oculographic, or eye movement) and EMG (electro-myographic, or muscle activity) recordings are simultaneously taken to give the scorer a composite picture of activity throughout the night.
The stages themselves are defined In terms of patterns or syndromes of EEG, EOG and EMG activity.
EEG, according to the Manual, should be recorded between an electrode placed centrally on the scalp and one behind the ear.
In practice many laboratories use two electrodes on the scalp, one at the vertex (midway centrally between the bridge of the nose and the inion, or bony bump at the base of the cranium), and one frontally, about two centimetres behind the hairline.
The EEG is recorded as the difference between these two electrode placements.
Eye movements are recorded from electrodes taped above each eyebrow to electrodes taped over the opposite cheekbone, giving two EOG channels.
These do not reflect activity from the eyes individually, but between them the two channels will record an eye movement in any direction.
What is being recorded here is not the electrical activity associated with the muscles controlling the movements of the eyes, but the change in electrical field caused by the rotation of the eyeballs in their sockets.
This is caused by the corneo-retinal potential — a standing potential across the retina of about one-tenth of a volt.
EOG changes themselves are to the same order as EEG changes — up to 150 microvolts, and they are typically recorded using the same time constants and level of amplification as the EEG channel.
An important point to remember about EOG recordings made using EEG amplifiers is that they never give direct information about the direction of gaze — only changes in direction — and the rate at which the galvanometer pens return to the midline of the paper chart is determined by the time constant setting.
Misunderstandings about the nature of the recordings contributed to some confusion in the early 1960s about whether the eye movements of dreaming sleep did or did not actually follow the action of the dream.
EMG recordings made from under the chin reflect the activity of the muscles in the neck.
These muscles are under the control of postural reflexes which ensure a level of tonic continuing activity almost all the time (unlike, for instance, the large muscles in the arms  and legs).
This measure gives a good index of the tonic level of muscular relaxation In light sleep, in identifying periods of movement which may contribute to outside interference in the EEG and EOG channels, and is crucial in determining the presence of REM (rapid eye movement) sleep, when there is little or no EMG activity.
(c) The EEC during sleep
EEG OBSERVATIONS
Early work in the 19305 and 194056 had established that there were systematic changes in brainwaves with sleep, in that large, slow waves developed very soon (within fifteen minutes) after a subject fell asleep at night, and during the night the amplitude of these waves waxed and waned.
A convention was established of sleep stages, indicated by the numbers I to 6, 6 being the "deepest" , with the biggest slow waves.
Rather puzzlingly, the EEC would sometimes revert to being low voltage, activated, while the subject was still plainly asleep.
These periods of low-voltage sleep were called "emergent stage I" because subjects were not as easily roused as from "ordinary" sleep onset Stage I sleep, and because, being continuous with deeper stages of sleep, these periods of light sleep were obviously not a transition between wakefulness and sleep, in the way that sleep onset Stage I seemed to be.
In 1953 Eugene Aserinsky and Nathaniel Kleitman reported rapid, saccadic (tracking) eye movements, similar in appearance to waking eye movements, associated with reports of dreaming.
It was not until 1957 that Dement and Kleitman identified "emergent Stage I" sleep as a completely distinct stage of sleep from other light sleep stages, always accompanied by rapid eye movements, and frequently by reports of dreaming.
A few years later, Ralph Berger discovered the loss of neck muscle tone which accompanied REM sleep.9 These two findings, linking EEC patterns with eye movement and neck and throat muscle activity, have formed the basis of the recording and scoring methods for sleep in humans now in use all over the world.
Psychophysiological measures are now used to define sleep states, rather than merely to describe them.
Figure 2.3 shows good examples of the psychophysiology associated with relaxed wakefulness and five  internationally recognized stages of sleep — four slow wave sleep stages, numbered 1 to 4, and stage REM (rapid eye movement) sleep which is associated with dreaming.
When subjects arrive at the sleep laboratory in the evening for a night's recording they prepare themselves for bed in the normal way.
When they are in their pyjamas, or dressing-gown if they wear nothing in bed, the electrodes are applied to their faces and heads.
It is possible to record from more than one subject at a time on a single EEG machine, so that it is common to have two bedrooms equipped with headboards (into which the electrodes are plugged)— for instance as in the Department of Human Sciences at Loughborough University — or to have two headboards and beds in a single bedroom, as in Hull.
Purpose-built accommodation, as for instance in Professor Ian Oswald's laboratory at Edinburgh University's Department of Psychiatry, may have facilities for up to five subjects to be recorded simultaneously, in sound-proofed bedrooms with air conditioning.
When the experimenter has confirmed that good signals are being recorded from all the subjects involved he or she will say good night and turn out the lights.
Most people find the environment of the  laboratory unusual, and on their first night they typically take longer to get to sleep than is usual.
On the second and subsequent nights in the laboratory a subject will remain indubitably awake, showing alpha rhythm (originally known as the "Berger rhythm" after Hans Berger, who first reported it) at 10 cycles a second (Hz) in the EEG, and periodic blinks in EOG, for less than ten minutes.
Drowsiness is first indicated by a reduction in the frequency of alpha rhythm, from about 10Hz to 8.5Hz or so In a young adult, as well as a reduction in its amplitude, and then by its disappearance.
It is replaced by a low-voltage (relatively flat) record with slow activity in the range 2–7Hz.
At the same time the blinks typical of wakefulness are replaced by slow rolling movements of the eyes, easily seen in the EOG, as the subject drifts into Stage I sleep.
Stage I sleep is defined in terms of the EEG and EOG records as consisting of a low voltage EEG with some slow activity, and occasional vertex sharp waves, and slow rolling eye movements (see example.)
As they go to sleep, subjects do not usually stay in Stage I for long— between one and ten minutes.
The less settled subject may alternate for a while between Stage I sleep and wakefulness, but usually once sleep takes over there is a fairly rapid transition from this stage to deeper sleep stages.
The onset of Stage 2 sleep is taken to be the first sleep spindle or K complex.
Sleep spindles are bursts of fast (13–15Hz) EEG activity lasting perhaps two seconds which increase in amplitude to about 50 microvolts and then decline, giving them their spindle-shaped envelope.
K complexes are phasic events (isolated occurrences) in which there is a sudden increase in negativity on the scalp, followed by a corresponding positive wave.
They last between half and two seconds and while their amplitude may only be in the region of 50 microvolts, they may be as large as 250 microvolts from peak to trough (see Fig. 2.6).
Stage 2 sleep is defined as comprising a low-voltage EEG, with mixed, slow frequencies and periodic sleep spindles and/or K complexes.
More or less as soon as the subject has settled into Stage 2 sleep, at the beginning of the night, larger slow waves begin to appear in the EEG, whose frequency is less than 2Hz.
These slow waves increase in amplitude and persistence until, when they occupy 20 per cent or more of the record, the requirements for the scoring of Stage 3 sleep are  satisfied.
Sleep spindles and K complexes may continue during Stage 3 sleep.
A healthy young adult will typically have reached this stage of sleep within 20 minutes of going to bed, and sleep now continues to deepen, with larger and more persistent slow waves dominating the EEG record.
These slow waves pervade the head to the extent that they are also picked up by the EOG electrodes, just as K complexes are.
When the slow waves occupy 50 per cent or more of the record the subject is judged to be in Stage 4 sleep.
So far as the deep slow wave sleep stages are concerned, therefore, the greater the amplitude and the slower the frequency of the EEG slow waves, the deeper the sleep.
Stage 3 is defined as comprising between 20 and 50 per cent slow waves in the EEG, and Stage 4 sleep as comprising over 50 per cent of the record dominated by slow waves.
It is conventional to regard all sleep Stages 1–4 as being slow wave sleep, to distinguish them from REM (rapid eye movement) sleep.
Figure 2.7 shows the typical patterning of sleep through the night, as shown by a healthy adult.
On going to sleep, all normal people start  with slow wave sleep, and do not have any REM sleep until at least forty-five minutes have elapsed.
There is then an alternation between slow wave sleep and REM sleep, with REM sleep recurring about every hour and a half.
The first REM sleep period is usually shorter than the subsequent ones — about fifteen minutes in adults, as against later periods of about half an hour.
Deep slow wave sleep (Stages 3 and 4) predominates in the first half of the night.
The patterning of sleep illustrated in Figure 2.8 is not only typical, but follows conventions which are universal.
However much people may vary in their lifestyles during the day, their sleep proceeds in the same regular pattern, obeying the same rules.
While it is unremarkable to observe that although some people eat three meals a day, and others miss out breakfast and lunch altogether, taking all their food in the evenings, there is no such parallel during sleep — no normal person has been found who, for instance, takes all his or her REM sleep in one session of ninety minutes at the beginning of the night, or saves it all up for a session in the early hours of the morning.
We are all slaves to the same mechanism, which proceeds every night to control our sleeping brains according to a complex set of rules only now becoming apparent.
It has also been very difficult indeed to establish any reliable differences in sleep profiles between different sorts of people — men versus women, the extroverted versus the introverted or the intelligent versus the unintelligent.
There are considerable differences between babies, young children, young adults and the aged, which will be dealt with later.
The most striking thing about sleep patterns within a broad age group, however, is how remarkably uniform they are.
THE FIRST-NIGHT EFFECT
Looking at the paraphernalia attached to the subject wired up for a night's recording, one might legitimately ask whether anybody could reasonably be expected to feel natural, and get to sleep in their usual way.
Might not the electrodes, the constraining wires, and the very fact of being observed in a laboratory, not only delay sleep but actually alter the quality of sleep from what it might usually be at home?
Experiments assessing the difference between the sleep achieved on successive nights in the laboratory have shown that there is indeed some evidence of difficulty in getting to sleep on the first night.
The  time between lights-out and getting to sleep (the so-called "sleep-onset time" ) is increased, and so is the amount of time spent in light sleep at the beginning of the night before deep slow wave sleep (Stage 4) and the first REM sleep period.
Second and subsequent nights in the laboratory show no progressive changes in young adult volunteer subjects.
Most experimental studies of sleep now allow subjects a night of acclimatization to laboratory conditions, so that on their first night they are wired up in the usual way, but whatever recordings made are discarded, and the experiments proper begin on the second night.
While most all-night recording experiments are over brief periods (of up to a week), some very extended studies have been done, and there is no evidence that the patterns of sleep we observe over short periods (after the first night) are in any way peculiar to the unfamiliarity of the laboratory environment.
BRAINWAVES AND THE EXPERIENCE OF BEING ASLEEP
If we shake someone and ask him if he was asleep he usually has a definite answer.
All are familiar with their own experiences of being asleep, and feel they can give definite answers.
As we shall see in the chapter on sleep problems, sometimes the "insomniacs" complaining of never sleeping are in fact, by psychophysiological criteria, achieving normal amounts of sleep, but their experience is that of staying awake.
What determines whether people feel they are asleep or awake?
A laboratory study "" using the old (Loomis) classification of sleep stages allowed subjects lying In bed and getting to sleep to indicate when they were "drifting" or "floating" by squeezing a bulb.
Subjects who characteristically had dominant alpha EEG rhythms when awake were most suitable for this task, as the level of alpha rhythm then acts as a good indicator of alertness.
(Some people produce few or no alpha rhythms, even when completely relaxed.)
These subjects tended to squeeze their bulbs when alpha rhythm had reduced — consistent with the idea that these experiences occur when cortical arousal drops.
If normal good sleepers are woken from Stage I sleep or Stage 2 sleep, and asked whether they were awake or asleep, they tend to report definitely feeling asleep only In Stage 2 sleep,"2 although this is not necessarily true for poor sleepers, who may deny they were asleep even when the EEG traces show clear signs of Stage 2 sleep.
(d) Sleep norms
INDIVIDUAL VARIATIONS
You don't have to record people's brainwaves in order to know how long they sleep.
Surveys have shown that adults sleep an average of seven and a half hours, with a standard deviation in the sample of about one hour.
That means that two-thirds of the population can be expected to sleep between six and a half and eight and a half hours a night, about 16 per cent regularly sleep over eight and a half hours, and another 16 per cent sleep under six and a half hours.
Healthy individuals regularly sleeping less than five hours or even as little as two hours in every twenty-four are rare, but represent a sizeable minority.
These people have been described as being typically highly active, personified in individuals such as the successful business man or the British Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher.
A laboratory study of two short sleepers by Jones and Oswald found that their pattern of sleep was not that of the "normal" sleeper's first half of the night.
Rather, while they showed the same pattern of alternating between slow wave sleep and REM sleep about every ninety minutes, the proportion of light sleep stages (I and 2) was low.
Almost all their time in bed was spent in either Stage 4 sleep or REM sleep, giving them a near-normal total amount of these two sleep stages, and very low levels of light sleep.
Another case study of an elderly lady in poor health who slept very little, by Ray Meddis and associates, found that her sleep was light and fitful and, over a period of a week, she only achieved one night's proper sleep.
When this occurred her pattern of sleep stages was more similar to a "normal" sleeper's than a "short" sleeper's.
There are occasional reports in the medical journals of people not sleeping for extended periods of time when suffering from illnesses interfering with brain function.
A recent and very interesting case is that of a fifty-three- year-old man in Italy who suddenly began to sleep less and less.
His habitual amount of sleep had been five to seven hours a night, with a half-hour siesta in the afternoon.
As his sleep problem developed, he could only manage two or three hours of sleep, frequently disturbed by vivid dreams.
Three months after his symptoms had started, he could not sleep at all, and suffered from waking dreams.
The last six months of his life were spent in hospital, where he  rarely slept, if ever, and he suffered from disorientation, inability to concentrate enough to do the simplest task, and was totally unintelligible.
He contracted a lung infection which did not respond to treatment.
On autopsy it was established that he had suffered from a very rare brain condition in which the thalamus progressively degenerated.
Two of his sisters and many of his relatives over three generations had died in the same way, indicating that the condition may be inherited.
Did lack of sleep alone kill this man and his relatives?
We cannot be sure, since the thalamus is a very important structure and damage to it may be lethal for a variety of reasons.
In this case, however, it seemed that the nature of the disease was systematically to destroy those nerve cells essential to the control of sleep, and these unfortunate people probably represent the closest that we can expect to find in the way of a natural experiment on the long-term effects of the denial of sleep.
Periodically there are press reports of otherwise healthy individuals who need no sleep at all.
These people rarely volunteer for investigation in controlled EEG studies.
One such case who did submit to continuous observation was reported from Ian Oswald's laboratory in Edinburgh.
This was a middle-aged man who had been involved in a road accident after which he suffered from headaches, difficulty in walking, and a total lack of sleep.
After repeated medical examinations and seven years of litigation he was awarded £12,000 in compensation, and "aided by continuous benefits, he stayed off work, exhausted through lack of sleep" .
After an initial two nights in the sleep laboratory in which it was confirmed that he was continuously awake, he returned with his wife for a five-night stay.
Over the first three days he was watched increasingly closely, as it appeared that he may have been sleeping during the early evening when no recordings were being made, and during the nights his wife seemed to be doing her best to keep him awake.
By the fourth day he had become obviously very sleepy.
His speech was slurred, he was making visual misinterpretations, looking very dishevelled, and seeming scarcely able to keep his eyes open.
On the fifth night he finally fell asleep when the electrodes were on and recordings were being made, and stayed asleep for two and a half hours until his wife woke him.
"He appeared disoriented, begged to be allowed to sleep, and said he must have been cured by an injection.
The EEG  appearances of slow wave sleep and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep had been normal."
Despite this demonstration of his habitual need for normal sleep, even if only for a few hours a night, this same individual appeared on television a few years later, again claiming never to sleep.
Whatever the explanation in this case, it is obvious that such claims must be treated with the greatest scepticism.
Nobody has yet been discovered who maintains any semblance of normal health without sleeping.
SLEEP PATTERNS IN NORMAL BABIES
The behavioural repertoire of newborn infants is somewhat limited, and there is of course no question of their reporting on whether they are awake or asleep.
A systematic description of neonatal "states" was first suggested by Wolff.
Avoiding any "anthropomorphic" assumptions, observations of the regularity of respiration, open or closed eyes, movements and vocalisation have resulted in the definition of five mutually exclusive syndromes or states which are now widely accepted.
Two of these states can be identified with sleep states which show a continuity of development to maturity in the form of REM sleep and deep slow wave sleep.
In neonates (newborn infants) REM sleep is termed "active" sleep, and the neonatal equivalent of slow wave sleep is "quiet" sleep.
The greatest changes in sleep in humans take place during the first year of life, with the normal one-year-old showing essentially the same patterns of sleep as the adult, although in different proportions of stages, and with a recognizably different EEG.
As any parent knows, the neonate does not recognize any distinction between night and day.
His or her patterns of sleep and wakefulness are determined by an intrinsic cyclical patterning of alternation of behavioural activity and sleep states, modulated by demands of hunger and thirst, which commonly resolves into a four-hour "day" by the end of the first month.
While some infants may go uncomplaining through the night without feeding by the age of two months they will not have spent the whole time asleep.
Observations show that they persist in waking periodically, even if remaining quiet, and the establishment of uninterrupted night-time sleep is uncommon before three months of age.
The neonatal infant's EEG during quiet sleep has few slow waves, and no sleep spindles.
Slow waves appear in bursts, separated by  periods of low voltage activity of about ten seconds.
In the first month after full term these slow wave bursts increase in length until the low voltage periods of quiet sleep are entirely displaced."
Sleep spindles develop during the first two months of life, varying in frequency between 10 and 4Hz although showing no systematic tendency to increase in frequency with age (as is the case with the waking alpha rhythm, which progressively becomes faster with age, to reach a maximum of 10–11Hz).
While there has been some disagreement over the incidence of EEG spindling in neonates, the consensus of reports indicates that the development of spindles in the EEG of normal sleeping infants occurs between the end of the second month and end of the fourth, and the appearance of persistent spindling earlier or later than this time window tends to be associated with other clinical abnormalities.
Normal sleep patterns at this stage have however been reported in a group with known severe brain abnormalities.
There are also great individual differences between normal infants which are not always obviously related to maturational age.
Sleep patterns m the first three months of life are difficult to categorize and, compared to the remarkable uniformity of adult sleep, show a high degree of idiosyncrasy.
Despite this, some consistent patterns have been established.
The typical full-term infant can be described as asleep for about seventeen hours out of the twenty-four.
Active sleep is easily identifiable with adult REM sleep, and the neonate will spend between 60 and 80 per cent of sleeping time in active (REM) sleep — ten to thirteen hours.
Unlike adults, infants may show very short delays between sleep onset and active sleep onset, sometimes going straight into active sleep.
The time between sleep onset and active sleep onset thus tends to be either very short indeed (less than ten minutes) or over fifty minutes, as the period of their alternation between active and quiet sleep is of the order of sixty minutes.
Active or REM sleep onset will persist for the first twelve months of life in normal infants.
DEVELOPMENTAL NORMS
The definitive work on sleep norms at different ages is by Robert Williams, Ismet Karacan and Carolyn Hursch from the Florida Sleep Laboratory who recorded the normal sleep patterns of over 200 subjects between three and seventy years of age and older over a period  of fifteen years.
The descriptions of sleep norms which follow derive largely from their work, with the exception of the norms for infants.
While many other studies have been done on the development of sleep, their results do not contradict the norms established in Florida, and the principal advantage of the work of the Williams group is that their sample sizes were appreciably large — at least twenty in each of thirteen age groups, and a consistent system of recording and scoring was used over all these subjects.
Prechtl's norms for infant sleep are similarly uncontroversial and based on recordings from twenty babies.
The considerable differences between infant sleep and  children's sleep are undeniable, even if there is some lack of unanimity about the precise relative amounts of active sleep, intermediate sleep and quiet sleep.
During childhood, adolescence, adulthood and middle age we can be confident of the consistency of evaluation of sleep.
In old age there is another problem, in assessing the amount of deep slow wave sleep (Stages 3 and 4).
When scoring sleep stages in young and middle-aged adults one encounters individual differences in the amplitude of the slow waves of Stage 4 sleep, and there is an understandable tendency to recognize the periods of sleep with the biggest slow waves in any individual as "their Stage 4 sleep" .
Typically, the amplitude of slow waves in deep sleep becomes smaller with ageing.
When applied to the elderly, this shifting criterion for scoring Stages 3 and 4 may tend to inflate the actual amount of deep slow wave sleep actually scored.
Another progressive change with age in sleeping patterns is the number of arousals during the night.
The twenty-year-old sleeps with fewer interruptions than the thirty-six-year-old, and there is evidence that this increasing fitfulness in sleep continues throughout the lifespan, with sixty- six-year-olds sleeping more soundly than ninety-five-year olds.
These brief wakenings do not prevent a similar total quantity of sleep to younger men and women, since we tend to stay in bed slightly longer as we get older.
There is some evidence that sleep disturbance in normal old men is more frequent than in normal old women.
Possibly this increase in the number of wakenings during the night is related to the attenuation with age of the twenty-four-hour (circadian) rhythm of body temperature and other physiological functions.
REM sleep can be identified with active sleep in the neonate, who spends about half the time in this state.
As the mature version of deep slow wave sleep develops in the first year of life, and daytime sleeping is displaced by wakefulness, the number of hours spent in active (REM) sleep is eroded until by the age of three years it has dropped from twelve hours to three or four.
After the age of ten the amount of REM sleep remains constant until old age.
Comparisons between quantities of neonatal quiet sleep and deep slow wave sleep stages (3 and 4) in older children and adults are improper, since quiet sleep develops into the whole range of slow wave sleep stages.
However, once well established as in the three-year-old toddler, Stages and 4 slow wave sleep occupy about three sleeping hours, reducing with age in the same way as REM sleep.
Unlike REM sleep, these sleep stages continue to reduce in middle-aged and elderly groups, so that in the over-seventies very little Stage 3 or 4 sleep is taken.
The typical person over seventy takes half as much REM sleep as the toddler, and about the same amount as a twenty-year-old.
Their deep slow wave sleep has, however, reduced to a quarter of the amount taken by the toddler, about half that of a twenty-year-old.
Even this short period spent in Stages and 4 may be an overestimate.
The Experience of Sleep
The Dreams of Rapid Eye Movement Sleep
In this preliminary chapter on dreaming and REM sleep some of the basic laboratory findings about dreaming sleep will be described.
The identification of particular EEG/EOG signs with a sleep state in which people are likely to be dreaming made it feasible to answer a number of questions which had previously been a matter for speculation, and which are perennially asked by ordinary people.
How long do dreams last?
Do they really go on for as long as they seem to, or are they, as some people have suggested, fleeting sensations before waking up?
Does everyone dream — and what determines whether a dream is remembered?
Does everyone really dream in colour?
Is dreaming necessary to maintain sanity?
If rapid eye movements accompany dreaming, does it mean that our eyes are following the action of the dreams?
Answers to most of these questions were provided in the fifteen years between 1960 and 1975.
There are of course still mysteries about dreaming, and for some of them, perhaps, the technology of the dream laboratory on its own will never provide a solution.
As Ian Oswald once remarked, we know very little about the function of everyday, waking consciousness, so perhaps it is over-optimistic to believe that we should achieve a complete understanding of sleeping consciousness merely because we have reliable physiological indices of when dreams are likely to occur.
(a) The natural history of dreaming
HOW LONG DO DREAMS LAST?
The idea that time may be dramatically distorted in dreaming, or even reversed, was given support in 1861 in Maury's book Sleep and Dreams.
He gave an account of a dream of his own about the French Revolution, and the reign of terror following it.
In the dream he became a participant, as a prisoner of a revolutionary tribunal whose judges included Marat and Robespierre.
After trial and condemnation to death Maury was taken to be guillotined in front of a large crowd.
He dreamed the actual execution, including his head being separated from his body, and then abruptly woke up to find that his bed headboard had fallen and struck him on the back of the neck in the same place as the guillotine in the dream.
The only rational explanation was that the stimulus of being struck must have initiated the whole dream sequence, which, although apparently very lengthy, must have proceeded fast enough to be fitted in between the blow on the neck and waking up.
This notion — that dreams are really fleeting impressions formed immediately before waking up, is still fairly prevalent.
In the Hull survey one of the statements to which respondents were invited to agree was "Dreams occur only in the few moments before you wake up" ; 18 endorsed this statement, and 23 thought it was maybe true, out of 149.
Some of those who thought the statement was true may have had very few experiences of extended dreams, and for them "dreaming" may literally consist of some recollections of thoughts or images which occurred immediately before waking up.
Others may genuinely believe that even lengthy dreams have been compressed into a brief period.
William Dement conducted a number of experiments to establish the extent to which subjects lost track of time during REM sleep, in association with Nathaniel Kleitman and Edward Wolpert.
In the first of these, reports of dreams were elicited from subjects woken from REM sleep on a total of 126 occasions.
As a rough estimate of the amount of dreaming that had been going on, they counted the number of words used by subjects in describing their dream.
The longer the preceding REM sleep period before the awakening, the larger the number of words the subjects tended to use.
In another experiment, subjects were woken either five or fifteen minutes after REM sleep had started, and asked to estimate which of the two intervals had been used.
They were correct 92 times out of Ill, indicating very good awareness of the amount of time elapsed.
A third, and crucially important, experiment involved using external stimuli to influence the content of dreaming itself.
Trying a pure tone  stimulus, light flashes, and a water spray on an exposed part of the body, Dement and Wolpert found that the water spray was most effective in influencing the content of dreams (although this stimulus also tended to wake the subjects up!).
Here is one of their examples: The S was sleeping on his back.
It was a hot summer night, and he was completely uncovered.
An eye-movement period started, and after 5 min. cold water was sprayed on his feet and legs.
One minute later he was awakened.
The first part of the dream involved being in a room talking to some friends.
Then,"two children came into the room and came over to me asking for water.
I had a glass of ice water and I tipped the glass to give it to them.
I was sitting, and I spilled the water on myself.
The children wanted the ice and tried to grab it, but it slipped away.
I got mad, because they were so greedy, and tried to shove them away from the chair.
Then I got out of the chair and was going to change my pants.
As I left the room I seemed to be in a school and I saw many children in the hall and I seemed to be late for a class.
I was starting to climb up some stairs when the bell rang."
They sprayed the subjects with cold water when they were undoubtedly in REM sleep, and then woke them after varying intervals of a few minutes.
Ten of the subjects like the one above) had unambiguous accounts of cold water in their dreams, and in these subjects their dream reports showed a very good correlation (in terms of the time that the action in the dream would have taken since the cold water spray) with the actual time elapsed.
Despite Maury's odd experience with the French Revolution, it seems that dreams proceed at a "normal" temporal pace.
Perhaps Maury was not completely woken up by the falling bed to begin with, and dreamt some of his dream with the bed-head lying on him.
It seems likely that our dreams are attempts to make sense of experiences which are vivid but inconsequential (as suggested by John Hughlings Jackson in his Perceptual Release Theory) and this will be dealt with later in the chapter.
Maury's dream could be a good example of this sort of attempt at comprehension of a series of striking but unconnected images and sensations, a form of the "effort after meaning" that the Cambridge psychologist Sir Frederick Bartlett ascribed to normal waking memory processes in the first half of this century.
DOES EVERYONE DREAM?
While most of us can recall dreams at least occasionally, there is a sizeable minority of people who claim never to dream, and who understandably have some difficulty in understanding what everyone else is talking about.
Laboratory experiments comparing "dreamers" with "non-dreamers" have shown that there is little difference between these groups in their EEG/EOG patterns while asleep.3,4 In all subjects there was the same orderly sequence of sleep stages, with REM sleep periods recurring at about 90-minute intervals throughout the night.
 "Non-dreamers" tend however to spend slightly less time in REM sleep, than "dreamers" , overall.
Is their failure to remember dreams on waking up in the morning because they "really" don't dream, or is it because they fail to remember them?
Donald Goodenough and his associates canvassed 60 subjects on the frequency with which they remembered dreaming.
They then persuaded the 8 highest scorers on their questionnaires who "dreamed every night" , as well as the 8 lowest scorers, who "dreamed less than once a month" to submit to laboratory recordings and wakenings during the night.
When woken from REM sleep, the self-reported dreamers reported dreams on almost every occasion (44 out of 49 wakenings) and also reported dreams on about half the occasions when they were woken from REM sleep.
The "non-dreamers" reported dreams on less than half the occasions when woken from REM sleep (19 out of 42) and only 7 times in 43 awakenings from REM sleep.
REM sleep is thus even more clearly associated with dreaming in so-called "non-dreamers" than regular dreamers, who tend to report dreaming whenever they're woken up!
The evidence from these experiments also showed that while waking people up from REM sleep regularly produced reports of dreaming, delaying the awakening until after the end of the REM sleep period produced a dramatic drop in the number of dreams recalled.
Even while asleep, we tend to forget our dreams as soon as they are over.
People who claimed that they generally did not dream, when woken from REM sleep, did in fact report dreams, but they were particularly prone to forgetting them — if woken after the REM period was over, they recalled even fewer instances of dreaming than those who claimed regularly to recall dreams in the morning.6 In another study generally confirming these findings it was also noticed that "non-dreamers" tended to report that they were awake and thinking when woken from REM sleep.
When their reports of what they were thinking about were examined, it was found that these were frequently bizarre, commonly involved complex stories with visual imagery and, so far as the experimenters were concerned, were indistinguishable from dream reports.
These subjects may therefore have been having the same sorts of experience as "dreamers" , but did not label their REM sleep experiences as "dreams" , but "thinking" .
It seems that while everybody does dream during REM sleep, most dreams are forgotten and some people forget more readily than others.
WHY ARE SO MANY DREAMS FORGOTTEN?
The poet Emerson expressed the difficulty in remembering dreams most eloquently: Dreams are jealous of being remembered; they dissipate instantly and angrily if you try to hold them.
When newly awakened from lively dreams, we are so near them, still agitated by them, still in their sphere — give us one syllable, one feature, one hint, and we should repossess the whole; hours of this strange entertainment would come trooping back to us; but we cannot get our hand on the first link or fibre, and the whole is lost.
There is a strange wistfulness in the speed with which it disperses and baffles our grasp.
The experiments discussed in the previous section make it clear that most of the experiences which can be recalled if people are woken up through the night are not normally remembered in the morning.
Even people who claim to remember dreams every morning only recall their most recent dream, and any dreams they may have had during the two or three REM periods earlier in the night, or even during REM sleep, are completely lost.
While we are all familiar with (and resigned to) a certain amount of forgetfulness during the day, the equivalent of being unable to remember breakfast or lunch by three o'clock in the afternoon would definitely put one in the category of suffering from a severe case of amnesic syndrome.
The evidence however clearly shows that this sort of wholesale forgetting is normal while we are asleep.
Something about the experience of dreaming makes it peculiarly  difficult to remember, even in ideal circumstances.
A common method for collecting dream reports is to ask people to keep dream diaries — to write down, as soon as they wake up in the morning, any dreams that they can remember.
In one study subjects were required to telephone the local weather information service on awakening, and to record a few details of the weather forecast on the top of their diary sheet before writing down their accounts of their dreams.
A control group were instructed to lie quietly in bed for a few moments before writing down what they could recall of their dreams.
The experimental subjects, distracted for a moment by having to make a telephone call and record the predicted temperature for the day, recalled very few dreams indeed compared to the control group.
Again, while distraction can cause forgetting during the day, this is normally confined to very recent memories which have no obvious meaning (such as unfamiliar telephone numbers that have just been looked up).
If briefly distracted from watching a film or television programme we should be very surprised not to be able to remember anything about it afterwards.
Dreams are therefore peculiarly unmemorable — unless remembered!
There are two possible sorts of explanation for the difficulties we have in recalling dreams.
One is that something about the dream itself (its illogicality perhaps) makes it difficult to remember, and the other that there is something about the physiological state in which we find ourselves when first woken up that makes remembering difficult.
There is a problem about investigating the first of these hypotheses in that the dreams that are remembered are presumably the ones that have more logical structure.
The most chaotic experiences are forgotten.
However, of the dreams that are reported some are more structured, have more coherent themes and plots, than others.
Waking subjects do not have any more difficulty remembering the most chaotic dreams than the most coherent.
Incoherence per se therefore should not make a dream impossible to recall.
Another hypothesis is that dreams are forgotten because they are repressed.
That is, their content arouses anxiety causing their recall to become unacceptably upsetting.
Freud himself expressed the view that some dreams, but not all, may be forgotten for this reason.
(It would, of course, be inconsistent with his theory if dreams that have already been rendered "harmless" by the dreamwork during dreaming remained potent sources of anxiety on awakening.)
Donald Goodenough, in his scholarly review of the very  technical evidence on this issue comparing the recall of dreams by different personality types, comes to the conclusion that while repression may be responsible for the forgetting of some dreams, it is not feasible that it could account for the majority.
This is very much in line with the evidence for repression in everyday life — while convincing anecdotal accounts certainly exist, as does some good experimental evidence for repression in the laboratory, the theory remains unconvincing as an explanation for most of what we forget.
One obvious example is the telephone number that is looked up, the directory closed, and then one is distracted for a moment by someone asking the time.
Merely looking at one's watch and giving the right time is usually enough to prevent the completely accurate recall of an unfamiliar telephone number.
No one would suggest that repression was at work there.
It seems likely that there is something about the state we are in while asleep that prevents memories from being stored in the normal way.
In the next chapter, which deals with experiments on sleep-learning, among other things, the evidence for this proposition will be discussed more fully.
The findings indicate that, as might be suspected from common experience, impressions formed during sleep are not retained.
Even if people are woken up and asked to learn something, if they go straight back to sleep they are likely to forget the whole episode.
Material presented to people during sleep is not remembered unless they are woken up by it, and remain awake for some time.
A minimum period of time filled by waking cortical arousal seems essential for the retention of memories.
DO WE DREAM IN COLOUR?
Just as some people claim never to dream, and some say they dream every night, there are those who rarely remember having dreams in colour, and those who always do.
A survey of college students showed that 51 per cent of men never dreamed in colour, while only 31 per cent of women never did."
Calvin Hall's large survey of dream content showed that only about a third of the total number of dreams reported contained references to colour.
Asking people to match the colours they could recall with colours on a standard colour chart revealed that only about half the dreams contained colour, and many of these were in pastel shades.
Fully saturated colours, interestingly, tended to be at the red end of the spectrum for the six subjects involved in this study, and only rarely were saturated blues, purples or blue-greens reported.
When subjects are woken from REM sleep and questioned about their dreams Edwin Kahn and his associates found that the incidence of reporting colours increased to 70 per cent.
Another 13 per cent of the reports were of "vaguely coloured" dreams.
Of the 61 dreams in which colour was reported, it was spontaneously mentioned in only 22 instances, and was elicited by further questioning in the other 39.
As the authors point out, colour is not usually the most important aspect of a dream, and, similarly, might not be mentioned in accounts of events in everyday life.
When dreams are recalled during the day, it would therefore be the most salient points that would be recalled, and the colour detail, which would have been available if the dreamer had been questioned about it on awakening, will have been forgotten.
Ralph Berger has also found that subjects woken from REM sleep report colour in their dreams far more frequently than people do when asked about their dreams during the day — even subjects who claimed never to dream in colour.
A simple answer to the question would be that We do, generally speaking, dream in colour, but that this aspect of the dream tends to be forgotten.
(b) Experiment investigations
LOOKING AT THE DREAMS
After watching the eye movements of subjects during REM sleep, and then obtaining reports from them of intense visual imagery, it seems only natural to assume that one has something to do with the other.
That is, the intense visual experiences of dreaming during REM sleep are signalled by eye movements because the eyes are actually scanning the images generated by the dream.
It has proved extremely difficult to establish the truth or falsehood of this apparently simple statement.
Some dreams are more visually intense than others, and some REM sleep periods have a great many more eye movements than others.
(As explained in the last chapter, REM sleep may be scored as such when hardly any rapid eye movements are occurring, so long as the record of low voltage EEC and reduced EMG continues uninterruptedly.)
Ralph Berger and Ian Oswald established that the REM sleep periods characterized by few and small eye movements were accompanied by experiences of what they called "passive" dreaming, with few events reported that the subject could have been scanning.
 "Active" dreams were accompanied by profuse rapid eye movements.
Even within a period of REM sleep, there are phases of intense eye movement separated by intervals of ocular quiescence.
Molinari and Foulkes found that subjects woken up following bursts of eye movement activity reported more vivid dreams than when woken up following intervals of REM sleep in which the eyes had been still.
The high correlation of bursts of rapid eye movements with intense dreaming tended to encourage early investigators in their impression that the eye movements were following the actions of 70–80 per cent of vivid dreams.19 However, when blind matches of EOG records with dream narratives have been made simply on the basis of written evidence and the polygraphic record, matching of reports to records has been no better than chance.
Second, while adults who have been blind all their lives report no visual dreams, and have no measurable rapid eye movements using EOG measures, they do have periods of low-voltage EEC with reduced muscle tone, consistent with REM sleep, "and if mechanical sensors are used to assess eye movement, it appears that their eyes do indeed wiggle about during these sleep phases." 
The lack of evidence using standard EOG measures can be attributed to the degeneration of the retina in these subjects.
This commonly results in the loss of the corneo-retinal potential, a standing potential difference of the order of one tenth of a volt across the back of the eyeball which contributes largely to the measurable changes in potential on the face resulting from eye movements in sighted people.
Third, attempts to map the eye movements directly on to the reported dreams (in terms of direction of gaze, and so on) have been dogged by the problem of actually measuring the position of the eyes using standard EEC equipment.
(EEC amplifiers record changes in potential, but, because they automatically filter out slow changes, are unable to provide information about the actual position of the eyes.
They are not direct coupled — DC — amplifiers.)
When recordings were made using DC amplifiers it became apparent that during REM sleep the eyes were almost constantly in motion, making slow, roving movements which would not be picked up by the standard (AC) amplifying equipment.
Bursts of fast eye movements were superimposed on these slow movements.
In this study it was also confirmed that the fast eye movements were associated with passages of vivid dreaming involving tracking of moving images, but the measured direction of movement of the eyes did not correspond very well with reports of direction of movement of objects in the dream.
Waking saccadic or tracking eye movements are faster when the eye has farther to travel, so that while an eye movement over 5 degrees is completed after about 60 milliseconds, so is a movement over 10 degrees.
These movements are preprogrammed "ballistic" responses whose velocities are determined by the anticipated distance of travel, ensuring that the eye arrives at the right place after a fixed period of time.
Eugene Aserinsky and his associates have recently discovered that the fast eye movements of REM sleep tend to be consistently slower than waking saccadic movements.
In addition, there is no difference in velocity between movements which are long and those which are short.
They checked on the possibility that saccadic movements made with the eyes closed, or in the dark, might be slowed, or that the velocity may then be independent of length of saccade, and found that they were not: that is, waking eye movements with eyes closed, or in the dark, are the same as with eyes opened and in the light.
The pattern of velocity of eye movements of REM sleep is quite unlike that of waking eye movements, and seems inconsistent with the idea that they reflect scanning responses.
Finally, it can be pointed out that newborn babies have profuse eye movements during REM sleep, although their vision is not good.
The weight of the evidence against the scanning hypothesis for REMs is very great.
It seems likely that these eye movements are involuntary symptoms of neurophysiological events taking place during REM sleep, with no direct relation to the images generated during dreaming.
DREAM DEPRIVATION
 "If you don't dream you will lose your mind" (Rolling Stones, "Ruby Tuesday" .)
The idea that dreaming is essential for sanity has been prevalent in popular science since the eighteenth century.
The modern story of this notion is a good example of the way that the media and the public at  large love to incorporate scientific evidence, however slender, to justify what they thought anyway, ignoring any evidence to the contrary.
The discovery that there was a practicable way not only of monitoring dreaming sleep, but possibly of controlling it as well, presented a great challenge.
Normal subjects always begin a sleep period with slow wave sleep, and do not start their first REM sleep period for at least forty-five minutes, sometimes as long as two hours.
They never begin the sleep period with REM sleep.
If woken during the night at the beginning of each REM sleep period, and then allowed to return to sleep, would they pick up where they left off, starting REM sleep, or start the night all over again?
What would be the psychological effect of preventing the dreams of REM sleep?
William Dement woke six subjects in this systematic way over a period of six nights, and found that on the first night they did seem to "start all over again" whenever properly woken, so that by the end of the night they had achieved a good deal of slow wave sleep and very little REM sleep.
On subsequent nights it became more difficult to prevent REM sleep, especially in the early hours, and the number of wakenings necessary increased night by night until by the fifth and sixth nights subjects were hardly getting any sleep at all.
On recovery nights, when subjects were allowed to sleep undisturbed, they took more REM sleep than usual, as if they were making up to some extent for the amount lost.
These findings were consistent with the idea that REM sleep, and perhaps the dreaming associated with it was especially important, perhaps representing the most important function of sleeping.
In his report of this first experiment Dement also reported that his subjects tended to become paranoid while deprived of REM sleep — ascribing sinister motives to the experimenter, and developing all sorts of unreasonable suspicions as well as having some bizarre experiences such as hallucinations (seeing or hearing things which were not there).
Not only, therefore, did sleep mechanisms rebel against the regime by more and more attempts to initiate REM sleep during the period of deprivation, and "make up" for the amount lost to some extent when allowed to, but the subjects also showed signs of psychological distress when it was prevented.
Subsequently Dement established that these psychiatric symptoms were not reliably elicited by depriving the subjects of REM sleep.
Rather, they were probably the consequence of the expectations of the  experimenters — the so-called "experimenter effect" .
In this instance, these expectations were communicated to the subjects through genuine concerns for their well-being.
Not only were the subjects told of what Dement thought might be the probable results of the regime, but they were provided with a psychiatrist on duty all the time to whom they could report any unusual sensation.
After the third day of REM sleep deprivation little sleep at all was being achieved, and the symptoms that the subjects showed were a combination of the effects of total sleep deprivation and suggestion.
Despite the fact that Dement performed experiments after this one in which his subjects showed none of the psychiatric symptoms with REM sleep deprivation, and that he himself made clear how his early observations were probably misleading about the effects of REM sleep deprivation, the idea that dreaming preserved sanity had been strongly reinforced.
It is not uncommon even now to read in popular science that this notion has firm scientific support.
It hasn't.
Many of the American psychiatrists who were doing much of the important pioneering empirical work on dreaming during the 1960s were deeply influenced by psychoanalysis.
While a strict Freudian interpretation of the function of dreaming would not necessarily imply that it preserved sanity so much as sleep, the neo-Freudians had developed the notion that during dreams conflicts were resolved, giving dreams a purpose in maintaining psychic equilibrium.
Freud himself didn't think that dreaming preserved sanity — on the contrary, as we shall see in the next chapter, the Freudian view was that the function of dreaming was to allow sleep to continue uninterrupted, despite a number of unacceptable ideas being expressed.
Dreaming, or the dreamwork, allowed these ideas, which would otherwise be too upsetting to be compatible with sleep, to be dressed up in symbolism, defused of their obviously sexual or aggressive meanings.
As it stands, classical Freudian theory should therefore predict that sleep might be disturbed by the prevention of dreaming, but that any untoward effects would be from the prevention of restorative sleep, rather than the prevention of dreaming per se.
Dreaming can on the other hand be seen as having a function in resolving emotional conflicts by a process of emotional integration.
This neo-Freudian theory has been articulated by Berger and others, and represents the sort of thinking underlying Dement's original  hypothesis, that the prevention of dreaming should cause emotional difficulties.
The effects of total sleep deprivation and of both REM sleep and deep slow wave sleep deprivation on subsequent sleep and performance will be discussed in Chapter 6.
The Quality of Sleeping Experience
(a) The experience of sleep
When I go to bed the experience is oddly similar to getting into a swimming pool.
It takes a few moments to adjust — one moment one is dry, wearing dry swimming trunks and walking about, and the next one is progressively getting wetter (including the swimming trunks, which somehow seems particularly inappropriate)— and it's only when half a length or so has been swum that the whole thing seems ordinary again.
Similarly, one minute I'm a busy wide-awake person, and the next, when the decision has been made to go to sleep, I'm a wide-awake person lying down in bed.
It requires a readjustment before the "normal" daytime mode of thinking changes to that of drowsiness, and is finally displaced by the onset of sleep.
During this rather curious period when one's thoughts are free to wander we are sometimes aware that the quality of sensation we are used to when awake has changed.
These odd experiences, typical of getting to sleep, or periods of drowsiness during the day, are not uncommon.
We accept our experience of waking consciousness as being normal and, for the most part, only professional philosophers spend much time thinking about its significance.
For the rest of us, it seems commonplace and obvious that we should be able to think, imagine, perceive and remember in the ways that we do, and we tend to take it for granted that the rest of the world has the same sort of experience of everyday life that we do.
Our experiences while asleep, or under the influence of drugs, sometimes seem inexplicable in terms of this rather humdrum awareness, much more personal, and therefore more interesting.
Some aspects of drowsiness fit this mould.
EARLY SLEEP STAGES AND EXPERIENCE
In the period of drowsiness preceding the oblivion of sleep the quality of thinking changes to become less logical and sometimes bizarre.
The incidents that are reported the following day are necessarily the more memorable ones — memorable for their oddity.
While much of the thinking during drowsiness maybe humdrum, as experiments involving waking people up during this state have shown, there are undoubtedly some unusual characteristics of style of thinking and of dreamlike imagery during drowsiness.
The psychologist Clark Hull reported the following sequence of thoughts: "Bill Hambra Ju [sic]know him?" 
Note: A moment ago while passing in mild lapse of attention, the above came into my mind with great distinctness.
It seemed as if I were speaking it…
I have noticed this just as clearly as the above many times while half asleep in bed but never had paper handy and so never wrote it down…
Question: Where in the world could that name have come from?
I haven't the slightest recollection of anything like it.
This human machine is a queer thing!"
Apart from thinking of this sort, a large proportion of people report some odd perceptual experiences — not dreams, strictly speaking, but quite different from the ordinariness of waking consciousness.
Hypnagogic experiences, as they are called, are characterized by a series of relatively disconnected but vivid images.
A survey of Aberdeen University students conducted by Peter McKellar showed that about two thirds of them had experienced these sensations, which were slightly more often auditory sensations than visual ones.
When asked to describe auditory sensations, McKellar's subjects frequently reported hearing snatches of music which could be recurrent…as is illustrated by a subject who recurrently imaged the last movement of Rachmaninov's Second Piano Concerto.
This subject added: "Occasionally I hear the first movement of his Third Concerto, which I do not know well enough to construct in my mind when I am fully conscious." 
Voices are also very commonly heard in this drowsy state, for instance, calling the sleeper's name.
These experiences are easily confused with  reality, and sometimes result in the sleeper's waking up completely and attempting to answer the voices.
Visual hypnagogic sensations may be similarly either isolated images or a series of images.
Very commonly, people see static landscapes, moving faces or a sequence of pictures or geometric shapes.
McKellar's subjects "…quite frequently likened the images to lantern slides…" and furthermore their unrelatedness both to current preoccupations and to each other made them seem like a series of lecturer's slides which had not only "…been mixed up but were really intended for some other lecture" .
There have been suggestions that some of these experiences, especially the sequences of geometrical shapes, or flashes, may be the result of discharges from the retina occurring in the absence of any stimulation — the so-called entoptic phenomenon — which can also be observed when the eyes are open in the pitch-dark.
Hypnagogic experiences may also reflect after-images of activities protractedly engaged in during the preceding day.
When going to sleep after spending a night watching EEG traces of sleeping subjects, for instance, I have had hypnagogic images of the traces (moving backwards) on going to sleep.
Incidentally, these images of traces sometimes persisted into my dreams, appearing in the sky above the action of the dream, giving me the impression that I could actually monitor my own sleep stages while dreaming.
Donald Hebb, the Canadian psychologist, reported: A day in the woods or a day-long car trip after a sedentary winter sometimes has an extraordinarily vivid aftereffect.
As I go to bed and shut my eyes — but not till then, though it may be hours since the conclusion of the special visual stimulation — a path through the bush or a winding highway begins to flow past me and continues to do so till sleep intervenes.
One explanation of how random entoptic discharges and after-images are constructed into fully developed perceptions — the Perceptual Release Theory — was first proposed by the neurologist John Hughlings Jackson and later developed as a general theory to account for hallucinations and dreams.
Simply put, during waking consciousness there is a demand by the alert cortex for perceptual  information from the senses, and the senses provide an abundance, which is mostly disregarded as only topically relevant information is attended to.
In the drowsy state there is very little coming in and yet the cortex is still relatively alert and demanding something to work on, although not alert enough to provide an effective inhibition of nonsense being offered by the senses.
Perceptions are constructed or formed from whatever would normally otherwise have been inhibited (such as the low-level random discharges from the retina).
According to this theory, half-formed thoughts, memories as well as low-quality visual and auditory inputs now become grist to the perceptual mill, combining to give hypnagogic images.
Estimates of the proportion of people experiencing hypnagogic imagery have varied considerably, depending partly on how exactly they were asked.
McKellar argued that while more than 70 per cent of people answering a questionnaire reported at least one hypnagogic experience the actual incidence may be even higher, as"it can be overlooked for a very long time even by those who subsequently realize that they have the experience frequently…
False negatives seem to occur by a process of ignoring what one is not alerted to notice, as well as from emotional blockage."
McKellar's work has been in the tradition of Francis Galton's inquiries into the considerable variations between individuals in their quality of imagery.
One might expect that those who report intense imagery when awake would also report more hypnagogic experiences.
The evidence that exists, however, suggests that subjects who are weak images in the waking state are just as likely to report hypnagogic images as those who are strong images.
PHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF HYPNAGOGIC EXPERIENCES
When subjects are interrupted on going to sleep and asked to report any mental activity whatsoever they usually have something to say about what was going on in their minds.
In Foulkes's and Vogel's laboratory study, for instance, standard EEG/EOG recordings were made and subjects questioned after periods of waking, Stage I sleep and Stage 2 sleep.
There was no clear relation between the depth of sleep as indicated by these measures and the incidence of reports.
Subjects came up with well-organized fantasy sequences after being roused from some periods with high levels of EEG alpha and saccadic  eye movements consistent with relaxed wakefulness.
It was difficult to distinguish these reports from those which were elicited from subjects roused from deeper levels of sleep.
The experimenters categorized the experiences in relation to the sensory modality principally involved and the connectedness of any plot.
One example given of a "dream" in this state of relaxed wakefulness reads more like a fantasy of wish-fulfilment rather than a sleeping dream account, although others were remarkably "dreamlike" .
Reports of thinking and imagery were also elicited from subjects woken from light, Stage 2 sleep.
There were, however, consistent differences in the quality of experience as wakefulness gave way to sleep.
Subjects began to feel a loss of control of the course of their thinking.
Their level of awareness of being in a laboratory declined, and their awareness that they were under instructions to observe their own sensations similarly became less strong.
Thinking and fantasizing seem to have constituted the majority of Foulkes's and Vogel's subjects' reports, but while it is possible to make fine distinctions between levels of sleep depth using EEG/ EOG measures, these did not seem to be very predictive of the quality of experience reported.
Most surprising, perhaps, is the number of reports of "everyday" thinking from subjects who were undoubtedly asleep, by psychophysiological criteria.
In addition, there were some reports of dreaming during wakefulness and light slow wave sleep which were bizarre, quite well organized in terms of plot, and involving unusual visual imagery — just like the full-fledged dreams of REM sleep.
Any hope for a unique syndrome of EEG/EOG patterns which might be associated with the odd experiences which McKellar's subjects reported must be abandoned.
As we fall asleep our mental state becomes somewhat unpredictable from such gross measures.
Sometimes we appear to ourselves to be making sense, sometimes we seem to be obviously deranged, and sometimes our thoughts are driven by the vivid imagery of dreams.
The psychophysiologist cannot as yet match the experiences of going to sleep with the measures of brain function that are currently available.
While the majority of us, if not all, probably have hypnagogic experiences of the sort reported by McKellar, they were by no means typical of  Foulkes's and Vogel's drowsy subjects, and must represent the more memorable events in most people's half-sleeps, rather than the most common.
ARE DREAMS CONFINED TO REM SLEEP?
Aserinsky and Kleitman in 1953 and Dement and Kleitman in 1957 noted 74 and 79 per cent reports from REM sleep awakenings respectively, and only 7 per cent reports from non-REM sleep awakenings, indicating a virtually perfect isomerism between the experience of dreaming and a well-defined Psychophysiological pattern.
In the first flush of enthusiasm following these unprecedented claims there was a very strong tendency to identical dreaming exclusively with REM sleep, presuming that any lack of identification of dreaming with eye movements could be put down to experimental error.
Some researchers, such as Ernest Hartmann, even called it D sleep (for dreaming) to distinguish it from non-dreaming slow wave sleep.
In the context of the reports that subjects make on going to sleep it is clear that much dreamlike activity goes on which is not associated with the syndrome of EEG, EOG and EMG activity defining REM sleep.
It was not long before some researchers were also reporting dream recalls following other non-REM sleep awakenings, and a lively controversy began on the question of whether night-time dreaming is confined to REM sleep, or whether it may be continuous through all sleep stages.
A recent review of the literature on this topic found that reports of dreaming varied in different studies from 74 to 100 per cent from REM sleep wakenings, and from 0 to 75 per cent from NREM sleep wakenings.
There were no obvious differences between the studies in the way in which they were conducted which could account for the wide range of rates of dream reporting from NREM sleep.
The studies only agreed on a consistently high rate of dream reports from REM sleep.
While sleep stages are well defined in terms of psychophysiology, what constitutes a dream is not, and the reviewers suggest that an important determinant of the number of NREM "dreams" collected is the predisposition of the experimenter.
That is, the reports made by subjects woken from NREM sleep are ambiguous, and open to interpretation as being either "thinking" or "dreaming" , while reports from REM sleep awakenings tend to be indubitably of  "dreams" .
What is clear is that mental life does not cease during NREM sleep, and REM sleep is not a necessary condition for dreaming.
Primary process thinking, dream "logic" and the construction of generally illogical stories all seem to take place throughout the night's sleep.
What sets the experience of REM sleep apart is the vividness of the visual imagery and the generally more compelling quality of the dreams associated with it.
INCORPORATION OF STIMULI INTO DREAMS
Almost everyone has a story to tell about dream incorporation — for instance dreaming about Arctic exploration only to wake up and find that the covers have slipped off and he is freezing cold, or dreaming of bells ringing only to wake up eventually to find that the alarm clock has been clattering for the last few minutes.
Are these dreams really triggered by outside stimuli, or are these reports only the outcome of rather memorable coincidence?
Second, how frequently are dreams influenced by such stimuli?
As we saw in the last chapter, a study in William Dement's laboratory verified that external stimuli could indeed be incorporated into dreams during REM sleep.
An example they gave is: The S was sleeping on his stomach.
His back was uncovered.
An eye movement period started and after it had persisted for 10 minutes, cold water was sprayed on his back.
Exactly 30 seconds later he was awakened.
The first part of the dream involved a rather complex description of acting in a play.
Then,"I was walking behind the leading lady when she suddenly collapsed and water was dripping on her face.
I ran over to her and felt water dripping on my back and head.
The roof was leaking.
I was very puzzled why she fell down and decided some plaster must have fallen on her.
I looked up and there was a hole in the roof.
I dragged her over to the side of the stage and began pulling the curtains.
Just then I woke up."
Dement reports some further experiments in his book Some Must Watch While Some Must Sleep."
(This book also includes fascinating anecdotes about the background to most of the pioneering experiments of the 1960s: Dement was personally involved in many of them.)
Using a variety of sound stimuli, including bugles, Dement  and his students started the tape recordings as soon as a REM period started.
They found that the dreams reported by the subjects were noticeably affected by the stimuli on over half the occasions.
The incorporation of stimuli is thus extremely common, if not invariable (given that on many occasions the effects of stimulation on dreaming will be so idiosyncratic that they are not recognized by experimenters).
Ralph Berger assessed the effects of meaningful verbal stimuli on dreaming.
These stimuli were the names of friends provided by the subject, which, when presented while the subjects were awake, had elicited the largest galvanic skin responses (GSRs).
Dream incorporation was judged to have taken placed on about half the occasions.
Of the 48 dreams which were judged to have been affected by the stimulus, there were 31 incorporations on the basis of assonance alone — for instance "Gillian" was represented as "Chilean" , "Jenny" as "Jemmy" , and "Mike" as "like" .
Only on 3 occasions did the named individual actually appear in the dream as themselves.
The orthodox psychoanalytic view of the processes underlying dream incorporation is that they maintain sleep.
The all-important notion of the dreamwork involves an assumption about the function of dreaming (and possibly of consciousness in general)— that the dream is controlling the subject's psychological state, and not the other way round.
Thus, internally generated ideas which would otherwise cause the subject to wake up blushing with shame or racked with guilt are transformed by the dreamwork into a symbolic code.
In the same way, external stimuli become incorporated into dreams in order to reduce their arousing effect.
The experimental evidence does not contradict this view, although it doesn't support it very strongly either.
While dream incorporations are explained by the psychoanalytic model, it could also be that only stimuli which fail to arouse the brain sufficiently to tip it into wakefulness result in dream incorporation, rather than that the dream incorporation results in continued sleeping.
Experimental evidence shows that the incorporation of stimuli into dreaming is indeed associated with continued sleep, rather than wakening.
Whether the incorporation actually protected sleep, as the Freudian theory would predict, or whether incorporation was the consequence of delayed arousal remains unclear.
Internally generated stimuli (such as feelings of hunger, thirst or sexual arousal) might also be expected to have an effect on dream content.
If dreams are wish-fulfilments, thirsty subjects should dream of quenching their thirsts and hungry subjects dream of eating.
Primo Levi, who spent a year in Auschwitz, reported widespread dreaming of food among the inmates: One can hear the sleepers breathing and snoring; some groan and speak.
Many lick their lips and move their jaws.
They are dreaming of eating; this is also a collective dream.
It is a pitiless dream which the creator of the Tantalus myth must have known.
You not only see the food, you feel it in your hands, distinct and concrete, you are aware of its rich and striking smell; someone in the dream even holds it up to your lips, but every time a different circumstance intervenes to prevent the consummation of the act.
Then the dream dissolves and breaks up into its elements, but it re-forms itself immediately after and begins again, similar, yet changed; and this without pause, for all of us, every night and for the whole of our sleep.
Volunteers in an experiment on the effects of prolonged starvation conducted by Ansel Keys in the 1950s did not report an increase in dreams about food, although their food intake was very low indeed — intended to match the conditions of deprivation suffered by people in places like Auschwitz.
Clues for an explanation for this discrepancy may be provided by some laboratory studies.
Dement and Wolpert obtained REM-awakening reports from volunteers who had not had any fluid intake for at least twenty-four hours.
They recorded not one instance of drinking or of thirst in a dream.
In another study George Bokert increased the degree of thirst in his subjects by not only depriving them of water for twenty-four hours, but also giving them a salty meal before going to bed.
Their dream reports included more water-related imagery, such as lakes or snow, as well as some explicitly thirst-satisfying objects, such as Pepsi Cola, than on control nights when they had been allowed fluids ad lib.
Subjects reporting gratifying dreams, including themes of eating and drinking during the course of the night, also drank less in the morning, and rated themselves as less thirsty than those who had not.
Thus while drive-related dreams and even simple dreams of wish-fulfilment can occur, they are not reliably elicited by the mere existence of an unsatisfied appetite.
In this context Primo Levi's account of his recovery from his ordeal in Auschwitz may be relevant: liberated by Soviet troops, he and his fellow-inmates spent a year in the Soviet Union.
While well-intentioned, the Russian authorities in wartime were somewhat unreliable in providing supplies, especially in any variety, and the story of these twelve months is one of continuing preoccupation with food and with foraging.
There are, however, no more reports of dreaming about food.
Thus, given liberty and the opportunity to cope realistically with the problem of getting enough to eat the dream process was no longer invoked.
Ansel Key's subjects knew they were not going to be starved to death, being part of a controlled experiment under constant medical supervision, so in their cases the implications of hunger were not life-threatening.
The dream process, not perhaps surprisingly, appears to be invoked in response to the meaning of hunger, rather than the level of deprivation in itself.
Thirst is a more imperative drive, intruding into dreams even when the subjects know full well that they are merely taking part in an experiment, and that water will be available in the morning.
People who give up cigarettes very commonly report explicit (and guilty) dreams about smoking in the first few weeks, even though there is every reason to believe that sleep actually becomes less disturbed on withdrawal from nicotine.
(Withdrawal from other drugs is typically associated with increased REM sleep time, disturbed sleep, and vivid dreaming.)
Again, the strength of craving in itself can be sufficient to induce dreams of wish-fulfilment, even when the dreamer "knows" that he has no intention of smoking again.
PRE-SLEEP STIMULATION AND DREAM CONTENT
It is very well known that dreams often contain elements — visual or ideational — that can be identified as being part of the previous day's experiment.
Much of our dream content is not so easily traced, but the incorporation of "day's residues" into dreams is very well established.
In a systematic study of his own dream life Freud tried to relate all his dreams to feelings and thoughts experienced the previous day.
It was not possible to do this without assuming that dreamwork  transformations took place.
That is, the "manifest dream's" apparently irrelevant and unpredictable content was actually deemed to have been systematically arrived at from a "latent dream" , whose implicit content had been the subject of some extensive dreamwork.
With sufficient ingenuity, an analyst can therefore trace any reported dream back to certain themes which he or she believes are preoccupying the dreamer.
If we could be sure that all dream content is determined in this way then this would not be an unreasonable thing to do.
Experimental studies relating pre-sleep stimulation to dream content are not obviously encouraging in this respect.
David Foulkes and Allan Rechtschaffen, showed either an amusing film or a violent TV western to adult subjects before bedtime, and found that direct incorporation of the content of either film was very rare indeed, although the violent film reliably induced more vivid, emotional dreams.
A similar study, using 7–11-year-old children as subjects compared dream reports following a violent western compared to a bland film about baseball.
Of the total of 179, 14 dream reports were judged to contain elements from the films, although there was no difference in the frequency of incorporation of scenes from the two films.
The more violent film was not followed by any more intense or hostile dreams than the bland one — perhaps indicating how accustomed these young subjects were to watching violent westerns!
Goodenough's group confirmed that the emotional content of dreams could be affected by pre-sleep stimulation (in this case, a film entitled subcision — explicitly showing a series of operations carried out on the penis as part of a tribal aboriginal initiation rite).
They found that the dreams reported following a screening of the stress-inducing film were more anxious than those reported following a neutral film.
A third study of the effects on dreaming of watching a film successfully demonstrates the limitations of this technique and also indicates some important factors in determining what becomes incorporated into a spontaneous dream.
Rosalind Cartwright showed a pornographic film to a group of conventional male medical students and to a group of young homosexual men, members of an American gay group university chapter.
The film included a suggestive ten-minute episode, set in an eighteenth-century brothel, in which a male customer chose a female prostitute, helped her undress in a bedroom and finally got into  bed with her, and a frankly explicit ten-minute episode of a newly wed bride and groom set in a hotel bedroom.
Both groups of subjects showed signs of sexual arousal during the screening of the film, indicated by penile strain gauges.
Their dreams showed marked differences between the groups, perhaps unexpectedly, in that the homosexual men produced a great many explicit sexual dreams, while the medical students tended, when scenes of nudity were included in their dreams, to interpret these in terms of clinical practice, maintaining their professional role.
(One might have expected heterosexual young men to be more influenced by what was after all a film of exclusively heterosexual practices.)
Were the gay group's "control" dreams also more sexually charged than the medical students'?
At least were their dreams after seeing the films more sexually explicit than on control nights?
Neither the account in Cartwright's book nor the more detailed published experimental reports answer these questions.
It is, however, likely that the pornographic film was a potent stimulus for both groups of young men, yet the effect it had on their dreams was only explicable in terms of their ideology — in particular, in terms of how they saw sexuality in relation to their own lives.
The homosexual men were deeply preoccupied with their own sexuality, and with proselytizing a liberated view of sexual practices.
The medical students, in entering a traditionally conservative profession, were obliged to subscribe to conventionally repressive attitudes.
Just as in real life they were assimilating a clinical attitude to human functions, many of which are taboo in Western society, their dreaming interpretations of their own sexuality were also in terms of a medical model.
Both these experiments and the studies on the effects of hunger and thirst on dreaming demonstrate the unpredictability of dreaming, explicable only in terms of semantics.
All the evidence points to dreaming being a highly complex cognitive activity.
Whatever the limitations of the psychoanalytic approach to dream analysis, it does at least attempt to take this into account, and the procedure of showing films, however vivid and disturbing, and then observing spontaneous dream reports, is intrinsically limited by the construction that the individual role puts on the film and the experiment itself.
Two laboratory studies which attempted to assess the effects of real-life stresses on dreams used patients either awaiting major surgery  or undergoing group therapy, in which they had to prepare themselves for a session devoted entirely to their own problems.
The major findings of this combination of case study and experimental method in the surgery patients were that (a) the preoperative dreams of the surgery subjects incorporated stress-related material both directly and symbolically;(b) the degree of incorporation was quite marked when the personal meaning of surgery and the individual modes of preparation were taken into account; and (c) the content of the dreams was more repetitious and constricted before than after surgery.
Similarly, with the patients anticipating and then undergoing a "focus session" of the psychotherapeutic group devoted entirely to their own problems, there was evidence that this traumatic event clearly affected dream content.
One explanation is that dreaming is an essential part of our adaptation to the demands of the world we face.
Not only does it perhaps help in the storage of new memories, but dreaming is actively helping us to solve emotional problems.
The dream process is thus not only a way of rehearsing new experiences but of commenting on them and resolving conflicts.
A problem with this idea is of course that most dreams are not remembered, so that even if solutions to problems are achieved during dreams they cannot be regarded as adaptive, unless we are to believe that these solutions are somehow incorporated unconsciously.
Some more recent theories of dreaming will be discussed in Chapter 5.
WHY REMEMBER OUR DREAMS?
Incubation has of course a long and reputable history in antiquity.
In the modern world the reasons for wanting to remember dreams have changed — nobody believes any more that an appropriate dream will cure physical illness, or perhaps predict the future.
Rather, the influence of psychoanalysis has encouraged the belief that the analysis of dreams will help cure mental ills.
While psychoanalysis itself is very expensive, time-consuming, not available on the National Health Service, and therefore practised on only a small number of people, its influence has been by no means confined to those directly benefiting from treatment.
Especially in the United States, a widespread belief exists that people should actively seek ways of developing themselves.
Meditation, yoga, and psychotherapy have all been taken up by Westerners as ways of helping themselves cope, and give meaning to their lives.
One prevalent notion is that this self-improvement can be achieved through encouraging less rational, more intuitive, styles of thinking, and that dreams represent this ideal.
Modern exponents of this ideal include Anne Faraday and Paul Garfield, whose books encourage the reader not only to keep dream diaries but to attempt to alter their dreams.
An experimental study of the ability of subjects to influence their own dreams was conducted at David Foulkes's laboratory.
In all, 29 subjects were selected who claimed to have successfully controlled already what they were going to dream, and who were strongly motivated to prove that this was indeed possible.
They prepared lists of their own intended dream topics, and kept daily records of their efforts at control and the dreams they recalled.
Four judges then tried to match the reported dreams with the topics, identifying between 5 and 9 of the 29 target suggestions, at barely more than a chance rate.
This disappointing result indicates that control over one's own dreams is very much more difficult than Garfield and Faraday have suggested.
(b) Memorable dream themes
While dreaming is inevitably idiosyncratic and personal, a number of themes regularly recur for many people.
Particular sensations, such as of falling or immobility, are occasional but almost universal.
Dreams of being chased, or of flying are also more frequent than one might expect, given that neither of these events happens very frequently in real life.
The dream topics discussed here are by no means representative of dreams reported from laboratory awakenings, some of them being quite uncommon.
In fact one study found that "typical dreams" (such as loss of teeth, nudity, death, flying, examinations) constituted less than 1 per cent of dreams collected from REM sleep awakenings.
Asking people the question "Have you ever dreamed of…?" any particular topic gives a different picture.
Table 4.1 gives the responses of American and Japanese college students to a variety of dream topics.
This survey, conducted in the mid 1950s when differences between US and Japanese culture were even greater than  they are now, found a positive correlation of .87 between these two samples' dreaming rates for the 34 topics — accounting for over 75 per cent of the variance.
(This correlation is somewhat inflated by the number of topics which hardly anybody in either group dreamed about- but using only the 15 topics dreamed about by at least half of one of the groups still gives a fairly high correlation of + .63 between the groups.)
There were some differences explicable only in terms of cultural factors which are indicated in the table, but what must be the most remarkable thing about these data, is the general unanimity with which these two groups of people thousands of miles apart dreamed.
REFLECTIVE DREAMS
Some dreams apparently offer a comment on life, and these I have called reflective dreams.
The absurdest dreams are probably some of the most difficult to remember, but some are great fun, like this one by the Irish poet Louis MacNeice.
He had just returned from a visit in 1937 to the Government fighting front in Spain.
I had a dream at this time that I was caught by the Nazis.
They took me to an enormous wall built of Pelasgian blocks.
In this wall was a great wrought-iron gate of eighteenth-century workmanship.
They unlocked this gate and thrust me through it, locked it behind me.
I found myself in the Alps with a narrow pass before me, began to ascend the rough and desolate track.
Plodding upwards, looking straight ahead of me or hardly looking at all, I was conscious suddenly of something on either side, looked  to the right and the left.
On the right and the left of my track, padding along in parallel silence were bears.
Bears of every size and colour, going inexorably forward, but looking at me sideways.
I had the feeling they were "not quite right" , steeled myself to go on, careful not to annoy them.
Then ahead of me, higher up the pass, I saw a woman, with a stab of joy in my diaphragm hurried to overtake her.
Overtook her; she looked straight out of Bond Street, tall and blonde, the height of elegance.
She too had been caught by the Nazis, I walked along beside her and the bears walked on each side of us.
But everything was all right now.
 "Who are you?" 
I said at last.
 "Oh," she said suavely, "I am the Czar's governess." 
What more can one say?
It brilliantly combines a legitimate trepidation about the Nazis with a certain ambivalence (perhaps typical of those on the bourgeois Left in Britain at the time) about the Russian bears who may or may not have been rescuing him, resolved in the end by the arrival of the charming governess — "better keep a hold on Nurse, just in case of something worse" !
A reflective dream of my own occurred when I was in the midst of writing my doctorate on the role of REM sleep in consolidation of memories.
One of the hypotheses I was considering was that during REM sleep (and therefore during REM sleep dreams) the entire memory system is accessible — none of the inhibitions present during wakeful life are active, and new memories can be fitted in to the appropriate cognitive structures during REM sleep.
Habitually a somewhat forgetful person, I had also for a couple of days been trying to remember the name of the director of the film Such Good Friends.
In my dream I was alone on an empty road, trying to remember the director's name, when a large open-topped car drove up, full of laughing passengers who seemed to be sharing their jokes in a foreign language.
The actor Robert Mitchum was in the back seat, and before they drove off I attracted his attention and said,"Mr Mitchum, please help me.
You starred in a film called River of No Return with Marilyn Monroe.
Please can you tell me the name of the director, because he also directed Such Good Friends, and I haven't been able to remember his name?"
Mr Mitchum leaned back, extremely relaxed, and said, "Very sorry, but I can't remember either." 
The car then drove off, but  suddenly I set off running after it, shouting,"Otto Preminger!
Otto Preminger!"and woke myself up shouting out loud.
Was my hypothesis correct?
Even my dream about it was ambivalent!
FALLING
The sensation of falling typically occurs at the beginning of the night, during Stage I sleep.
It is associated with a muscular spasm of the arms, legs, or whole body which is known as a "myoclonic jerk" , which is common to many mammals.
Like yawning and hiccupping, it is involuntary, and yet undeniably under the control of the brain.
Ian Oswald has suggested that these jerks may be the outcome of an arousal response, since they can be elicited by sounds heard while dropping off to sleep, and are associated with small K complexes in the EEG.
These events are not normally associated with any coherent dream sequence, although they may be preceded by a feeling of floating (reminiscent of the "aura" often experienced by people suffering from epilepsy, giving warning of an imminent convulsive fit).
While analogous, in this sense, to an epileptic seizure, there is no evidence that these jerks have anything else in common with epilepsy.
It seems likely that the sensation of falling is the outcome of cortical interpretation of the production of this innate response, rather than being intrinsic to its generation.
Falling in dreams is quite common: surveys have found that between 50 and 80 per cent of subject samples report at least one falling dream.
These dreams tend not to be about sudden drops or stumbles, but of long drops from high buildings or down deep holes, ending in collisions with the ground, or perhaps with miraculously soft landings.
FLYING
In The Interpretation of Dreams Freud related how a patient regularly dreamed of floating a couple of feet off the ground.
His interpretation was that this fulfilled her wish to avoid contamination from other human beings, and to achieve greater stature.
(She was very short.)
More generally, he attempted to relate the sensation of flying during a dream to sensations from the ventilation of the lungs during sleep, or to childhood memories of being thrown in the air.
My nine-year-old son recently told me of dreaming of swinging violently in the hammock  (something he frequently does during the summer) and falling out (again, a frequent occurrence), but instead of landing on the ground he floated, and started a floating dream in which he effortlessly travelled around the garden suspended above the ground.
Although the hammock episode is explicable in terms of his experience, the subsequent transition to drifting above the ground cannot reasonably be related to his usual fate when falling out of the hammock; these dreams, which are not uncommon, seem uniquely detached from any experience in real life.
For Artemidorus, all dreams were classified as being either theorematic or allegorical.
The former describe events which are possible if not mundane, while the latter are metaphors.
In these terms flying dreams qualify better as being allegorical than most.
Ann Faraday also reports these two types of flying dream, both from personal experience and from reports from her subjects.
This sort of dream seems distinct from any recollections of flying in an aeroplane — few people have flown in an aeroplane at roof-top height and in any case the experience would probably be quite different from the drifting and soaring of the typical flying dream.
If they are as divorced from experience as they seem, the only explanations for their regular occurrence in a variety of people must be either, following Jung, that these are archetypal dreams with some allegorical significance, or that they represent an attempt to make sense out of experiences really occurring during dreaming sleep — an attempt to make a coherent story out of some pattern of the highly active discharges from the hindbrain which are a feature of REM sleep.
This argument will be developed at greater length in Chapter 7.
An unusual aspect of these dreams is the cautious attitude that dreamers tend to adopt to flying — a rare example of commentary within a dream, of insight or lucidity.
This represents perhaps an indication of the forced nature of the experience — forced by the combination of the sensation of immobility of REM sleep in association with the rich visual experience offered by the overactive hindbrain.
When I conducted a "phone-in" on sleep and dreaming on a local radio station a few years ago somebody called in to ask what I had to say about flying dreams.
 "Do you have them?" 
I asked.
 "Yes." 
 "Oh, so do I, aren't they fun?" 
I said.
 "Yes, but how do you get the height?" he replied, "Most of the time I just float two feet off the ground, and hardly ever get to fly at any decent height." 
This struck me very forcibly, as I too have occasionally had both sorts of flying dream, and while floating is quite enjoyable, flying at tree-top level is much more satisfactory.
I couldn't think of any suitable advice at the time.
That night I had a floating flying dream and, hovering in an upright position two feet or so above the ground, I remembered the caller's problem and immediately found a solution.
In my right hand was a small tray, and by tilting it in the breeze I found that I could obtain enough lift to get up to any height I wanted, and was soon soaring into the air, travelling at will.
When I woke up it was with the certainty that I had solved an extremely important problem and was eager to try it out at once.
It seemed incautious to attempt it indoors, and I was half-way out of bed to get a tray to take out into the garden before I realized the ridiculous nature of the enterprise.
Another solution to the problem of gaining height was told me by one of my respondents, who dreamed of climbing a high flagpole.
When at the top he was disappointed to find no flag, but with some cautious experimentation discovered that he did not need to hold on to the pole — he could float.
Once confident in his new power he flew at flagpole height with the greatest of ease.
REVELATION
A "feeling of knowing" sometimes accompanies an aspect of the dream which is carried over into wakefulness (for instance the certainty that I could fly when I had my flying dream).
This feeling is familiar to heavy drinkers in vino veritas: "Sobriety diminishes, discriminates and says no; drunkenness expands, unites and says yes." 
This phenomenon is well known among people taking nitrous oxide or mescaline, as well as drunks.
A revelation which William James experienced when taking nitrous oxide took the form of doggerel, which he genuinely believed to be of enormous significance while he was under the influence of the drug: Higamous Hogamous, women are monogamous, Hogamous higamous, men are polygamous.
Possibly there are similarities between the neurological state in sleep and drunkenness which provide the substrate for this experience.
In any  case, the certainty one feels is normally misplaced, although there are a few instances when genuinely creative thinking has been documented as taking place during dreams.
Most popular books on dreaming include Kekule's discovery of the benzene ring and Coleridge's "Kubla Khan" as examples.
Inspiration without effort is an attractive idea, and in recent history the psychedelic movement of the 1960s promised increased understanding with the use of drugs.
The Romantic movement of the early nineteenth century also celebrated personal revelation, inspirational creation, and opium, like cannabis in the 1960s, was a fashionable drug (freely available over the counter in all sorts of remedies).
Samuel Taylor Coleridge had been reading Purchas's His Pilgrimage after taking some opium: In Xamdu did Cublai Can build a stately palace, encompassing sixteene miles of plaine ground with a wall, wherein are fertile Meddowes, pleasant Springs, delightful Streames, and all sorts of beasts of chase and game, and in the middest thereof a sumptuous house of pleasure.
Almost twenty years alter the incident Coleridge was persuaded by Byron to publish the poem, and he then made the sensational claim that he had been able to remember 200 to 300 lines of perfect poetry when he had awoken from a drug-induced sleep, and was busy writing them down when he was interrupted by someone from Porlock demanding to see him on business.
When the visitor had left an hour later he could remember nothing of the rest — hence the uncompleted lines of verse with which we are left.
Literary critics such as Elisabeth Schneider and Molly Lefebure have suggested that this account is probably a gross exaggeration — that is, that while Coleridge may have dreamed about Cublai Can, the poetry was not provided in the dream in its complete form, but required years of revision.
All the evidence seems to indicate that the account of the dream grew in the interval with the Romantic ideal of the autonomy of the creative process.
William Empson has commented, "I find it a completely achieved poem; probably Coleridge was lying when he told the story of the person from Porlock, nearly twenty years later…" 
Coleridge's other drug-induced efforts are sheer doggerel by comparison and like many drug addicts he was famous for frequently taking great liberties  with the exact truth — especially where his drug habit was involved.
The other frequently cited example of creation during a dream is that of F. A. Kekule, a nineteenth-century chemist who knew the composition of benzene — hydrogen and carbon — and its molecular weight, which gave six atoms each of carbon and hydrogen in the molecule.
In his attempt to construct a model of the molecule, given the valencies of these two elements, there was no obvious way that the twelve atoms could be arranged into a conventional chain, and he had been wrestling with the problem for quite some time.
One evening, dozing in front of a fire, he had a hypnagogic vision:…this time the smaller groups (of atoms) kept modestly in the background.
My mental eye, rendered more acute by repeated visions of this kind, could now distinguish larger structures, of manifold conformation; long rows, sometimes more closely fitted together; all twining and twisting in snakelike motion.
But look!
What was that?
One of the snakes had seized hold of its own tail and the form whirled mockingly before my eyes.
as if by a flash of lightning, I awoke as if struck by lightning; this time again I spent the rest of the night working out the consequences.
Arranging the carbon atoms in a ring satisfied the laws of valency, since each of them could share two bonds with one of its neighbour, leaving another one to attach to the hydrogen atoms arranged around the outside.
This insight opened up the whole world of aromatic organic chemistry.
A less well-known example is of H. V. Hilprecht, an archaeologist at Pennsylvania University who in 1893 was given drawings of fragments of agate excavated from the Babylonian temple of Bal at Nippur.
He thought they might be finger rings, but wasn't sure.
In a dream a tall thin priest informed him that the two pieces came from the same votive cylinder and had been cut in two to make earrings for a statue of the god Ninib.
Later in the year he visited the museum in Istanbul where the fragments were kept and demonstrated their exact fit.
These two examples of successful problem-solving when dozing or dreaming are typical only in that a feeling of certainty accompanied them — what is unusual is that these were realistic solutions.
Just how often is inspiration misguided?
Arthur Koestler has commented,…every original thinker who relies, as he must, on his unconscious hunches, incurs much greater risks to his career and sanity than his more pedestrian colleagues.
 "The world little knows" , wrote Faraday, "how many of the thoughts and theories which have passed through the mind of a scientific investigator have been crushed in silence and secrecy; that in the most successful instances not a tenth of the suggestions, the hopes, the wishes, the preliminary conclusions have been realized." 
Darwin, Huxley, and Planck, among many others, made similar confessions; Einstein lost "two years of hard work" owing to a false inspiration.
 "The imagination" , wrote Beveridge,"merely enables us to wander into the darkness of the unknown where, by the dim light of the knowledge that we carry, we may glimpse something that seems of interest.
But when we bring it out and examine it more closely it usually proves to be only trash whose glitter had caught our attention.
Imagination is at once the source of all hope and inspiration but also of frustration.
To forget this is to court despair.
As with all creative activity, the final synthesis of ideas represents the endpoint of a great deal of thinking, of preoccupation with some problem.
The nineteenth-century physiologist, physicist and psychologist, von Helmholtz, who contributed substantially to every discipline that he engaged in, described the process thus: It was always necessary, first of all, that I should have turned my problem over on all sides to such an extent that I had all its angles and complexities "in my head" and could run through them freely without writing…
To bring the matter to that point is usually impossible without long preliminary labour.
While Helmholtz did not report solving problems in dreams, he did apparently rely to some extent on an autonomous process, so that once he had done the groundwork on a problem he sometimes achieved his insights apparently spontaneously, for instance when out walking.
The role of dreaming in this very important process must be regarded as slight.
The "feeling of knowing" offered either when drunk, drugged, drowsy or asleep is no reliable indication of having achieved a real solution to a problem; there are unfortunately no short cuts in that direction!
EXPOSURE — DREAMS OF SHAME
Freud's comment on dreams of exposure was,…the dream of nakedness demands our attention only when shame and embarrassment are felt in it, when one wishes to escape or to hide, and when one feels the strange inhibition of being unable to stir from the spot, and of being utterly powerless to alter the painful situation…
The essential point is that one has a painful feeling of shame, and is anxious to hide one's nakedness, usually by means of locomotion, but is absolutely unable to do so.
Freud's observation that these dreams are fuelled by a sense of shame seems uncontroversial.
Interestingly, in the survey referred to earlier twice as many Americans as Japanese reported ever having dreamed of being inappropriately dressed, or being nude.
An explanation for this may lie in the way that children are treated in these two cultures: Western conditioning tends to be based on the idea of guilt.
Telling a child that he or she is bad when they have behaved wrongly is common in the West, but as Susan Sontag has observed, it is unheard of in the East, where the child would be told to be ashamed of itself.
For Westerners the sense of shame and embarrassment has become strongly associated with nakedness and the proprieties of dress and attitudes towards nudity (especially among conventional Protestants).
They are also peculiarly prudish and voyeuristic.
For the Japanese students the shameful dream may not be confined to these topics — for instance many of their dreams about failing examinations or their schooling in general may have been intrinsically shameful, and they reported both of these more often than the Americans.
IMMOBILITY
A sensation of being unable to move is common in many dreams, including some nightmares.
Sometimes one can move only excruciatingly slowly, however pressing it seems to move quick.
It is well established that we are in fact in a state of muscular flaccid paralysis during REM sleep, with the exception of the muscles controlling respiration, and the eyes.
In some species this inhibition of motor discharge at the level of the pons (a structure at the top of the spinal cord) is more general than others.
Dogs in REM sleep sometimes  move their legs as if running, and in monkeys the whole face may writhe and twitch.
At any rate, it is reasonable to interpret this very common experience during dreaming as being a response to an awareness, at some level, of the inability to move.
Interestingly, Freud anticipated the discovery of motor paralysis during REM sleep by more than sixty years, when in his"Project for a Scientific Psychology he asserted that there is no motor discharge during dreaming.
He later addressed the question of why this awareness only arises occasionally (in The Interpretation of Dreams) by saying that it is an expression of conflict about the will.
That is, if we do attempt to make a movement during dreaming it is certain to fail, and this provides an opportunity to express the idea that our intentions are being thwarted.
One could equally argue that imperative, strenuous movements are rarely dreamed — one tends to be an observer, paying little attention to how one gets about.
Only when the dream focuses on the attempt to make a movement is the problem apparent.
NIGHTMARES — DREAMS OF FEAR, GUILT AND HORROR
Nightmares can perhaps better be defined in terms of the emotions they evoke, rather than any particular subject-matter.
These emotions are primarily of fear, guilt and horror, in various proportions, and the dream ends with the subject's waking up.
While they might be regarded as disorders of sleep, and will be discussed in the chapters on sleep problems, they are so prevalent, so much a part of normal life, that, like sleepwalking, they deserve a place in any account of normal sleep and dreaming.
Sheer terror in a nightmare can be the result of an unseen, hidden menace — for instance behind a closed door.
Unusually for dreaming, the plot is not in this case being driven by the visual imagery, but it is almost as if the feeling of terror is primary, and the process of dreaming is to interpret the somewhat mundane imagery to accommodate the emotion.
While some nightmares like this are consummated by the monster's actually making an appearance, it is not necessary — the terror may never become actualized.
It is necessary to distinguish "night terrors" from dreaming nightmares.
The former, relatively common among children, occur during deep slow wave (Stage 4) sleep, and are not accompanied by any visual imagery or a coherent dream.
Nightmares occurring during REM  sleep may be equally frightening, but are accompanied by a story, with vivid visual imagery to sustain it.
The purely guilty nightmare might be illustrated in terms of sexual repression and guilt by Mary Baxter Eddy's dream of being assaulted by a strange man while she was with a Christian Science congregation.
She managed to disengage herself from this unwanted lover and ran into a house — which unfortunately turned out to be one of ill-repute.
The man followed, locked the door, and laughed.
Only when Mrs Eddy understood her predicament did the nightmare dissolve.
Nightmares of pure horror are expressed in dreams of cannibalism, gory deaths and graveyard ghouls.
The author Gustave Flaubert once dreamed of lying in a curtained bed.
He was aware of footsteps on the stairs and, at the same time, a breath of foul-smelling air wafted into his room.
Then seven or eight black-bearded fellows entered with daggers held between their teeth.
They approached the bed; their teeth made gnashing sounds.
Each finger left a tell-tale bloodstain on the white bed curtains.
For a long while seven or eight pairs of lidless eyes gazed at Flaubert.
The typical prisoner of nightmare, he could neither shout nor move.
When at last they drew back, he saw that one side of their faces was skinless and bleeding.
They lifted all his clothes, leaving blood on every item, and sat down to eat.
As they broke bread it spurted and dripped blood, and their mirth was the rattle in a dying man's throat.
The apparitions vanished to leave the whole room smeared with blood.
Flaubert knew a choking sensation and felt as if he had swallowed flesh.
Then he heard a long cry…
As in a Hammer horror film, the anticipation of something dreadful provides the engine to this dream — the seven bearded men's appalling appearance was not for instance immediately apparent, and even though they removed his clothes and started to eat, there was no explicit imagery of himself implicated in the cannibalistic orgy, tasting flesh — presumably his own.
Again, it seems that the emotion of horror came first, and the dream was constructed to accommodate it.
How else would the dreamer know at the beginning of the dream (as he or  she always does) that something horrific was going to happen?
There are no screen credits at the beginnings of dreams to tell you what sort of film you are going to see, but there might as well have been in these nightmares, because the tenor, horror or guilt is excruciatingly present before the first scenes have even been played.
What is a Dream?
Theories of Dreaming
(a) A description of dreaming
While a great deal has been discovered about the physiology of sleep, and psychologists have developed reliable techniques for establishing when people are likely to be dreaming, there has not been an equivalent amount of progress in understanding the nature of dreams.
A starting point for any analysis of this nature must be to establish clearly how dreaming differs from waking consciousness.
Dreams happen to us, rather than being a product of conscious control, as fantasies are.
When dreaming we are the spectators of an unfolding drama, and only rarely does one have the impression of being in control.
 "Lucid" dreaming, when the dreamer "knows" that he or she is dreaming, and makes decisions about how the dream plot should develop, is rare.
More typically, things happen and we observe.
While there may be a coherent plot, events do not unfold in any steady progression — rather, there are sudden changes in plot, or scene shifts, which are sometimes baffling.
Ordinary logic is suspended.
One can fly.
People can turn into animals.
We encounter people who have been dead for years, or improbably have conversations with film stars or royalty.
The dreams that subjects report in the laboratory tend to be mundane, and lack the bizarre quality of dreams reported in the morning.
This is probably because only the strangest experiences are remembered by people waking normally after a night's sleep, and the more everyday the dream content, the less memorable it is.
Ann Faraday has also offered some evidence that the last dreams of the night tend to be more vivid than those earlier in the night.
The oddness of dreaming  experience is, however, undeniable.
One feature of this oddness which has perhaps been overlooked was pointed out by Allan Rechtschaffen, which is what he called the single mindedness of dreams.
When awake, we normally reflect on the stream of consciousness as it goes on.
In addition, we can be aware that we are in one place, perhaps seated at a desk, and at the same time imagine something else.
Rechtschaffen claims that during dreaming this is not possible.
He says, "I cannot remember a dream report which took the form," Well, I was dreaming of such and such, but as I was dreaming this I was imagining a different scene which was completely unrelated. "" 
The imagery of the dream totally dominates consciousness.
Paradoxically, while dreaming we are without imagination and we are not aware that we are dreaming.
Instances of "lucid" dreaming, when the dreamer is aware that he or she is dreaming, are rare, even among those who claim to experience it frequently.
This is totally different from the state of affairs when we are awake and have taken an hallucinatory drug, when, however compelling the hallucination, we are well aware that the experience is drug-induced, and not "real" .
Our conscious control of attention between the reflective, evaluative stream of thought and the thinking essential to the task in hand is vital to our normal processes of registering memories.
We form intentions to remember and categorize and order what we are going to remember in terms of our past experience.
The massive forgetting of dreams can be explained in terms of the strait-jacket of a single thought-stream preventing the formation of any such intention, or dream events from being brought into perspective or made sense of.
As Erasmus Darwin commented in 1794.
 "We never exercise our reason or recollection in dreams" (see Chapter I).
Rechtschaffen's is a lucid, insightful account of the phenomenology of dreaming, which, despite the many advances that have been made in understanding the natural history of sleep and dreaming, remains unusual in attempting to deal directly with the experience of dreaming.
Of course the phenomenological approach has been with us for a long time, and has been the primary source of evidence in the psychoanalytic tradition.
(b) The psychoanalytic approach
Freud's analysis of dreaming remains the most influential single  account that we have.
He and other psychoanalysts have relied on dreams recollected during therapy sessions, or those they could recall themselves.
The goal of psychoanalysis was the development of a new set of techniques for use in psychiatry, and in this context dreams tended to be treated as neurotic symptoms rather than as a normal aspect of experience.
Dreams seemed to provide a royal road to the understanding of the patients' subconscious.
For Freud, "…dreams are the fulfilment of wishes…" 
He asserted that there are two distinct forms of thinking — primary process thinking, as exemplified in dreaming, and secondary process thinking, as exemplified in logical reasoning.
Primary process thinking is driven by what he called the pleasure principle, whereby the instant gratification of infantile desires is achieved by making use of a number of irrational but personally satisfying mental tricks (mechanisms he called condensation, displacement, substitution and symbolization).
During waking life primary process thinking is displaced during the child's development by secondary process thinking, and in the adult it remains as a neurotic symptom, most clearly during dreaming, but also operating at a subconscious level to influence waking behaviour.
Most dreams are not obviously simple wish-fulfilments — dreams of personal glory, gratifying sexual encounters ending in orgasm, or the confounding of enemies.
In order to accommodate this fact Freud did not abandon the idea that all dreams were wish-fulfilments, but hypothesized a mechanism, the dreamwork, whereby dreams were censored.
The manifest dream that is available for recall is thus a compromise, whereby the wish-fulfilments have been disguised.
The latent dream, only accessible through extensive analysis of the manifest dream, is the "true" dream — the expression in wish-fulfilment of strongly-felt desires.
Sleep is physiologically necessary, and while asleep there are periodic surges of instinctual energy giving rise to these unacceptable, anxiety-provoking thoughts.
Manifest dreams are the outcome of a process which allows the expression of these thoughts, preserving sleep by preventing them from being overtly explicit.
Freudian dream analysis proceeded by the patient's lying down on the couch, and in as relaxed a frame of mind as possible recounting his or her dream, and then considering the dream images in turn, providing free associations to the object represented.
This technique of free association, in which the patient is encouraged to say the first thing  that comes to mind, reveals connotations of the dream image which might otherwise not have been obvious.
In practice, the analyst will direct the patient towards those connotations which seem most pertinent — namely, in Freud's case, sexual connotations.
An analysis may go on for years, so the free associations, and the dreams recalled, will be conditioned by the analytic process itself, the patient's contribution increasingly representing the assumptions of the analyst.
Modern psychoanalysts still make extensive use of dream analysis, but are not necessarily interested in uncovering the "latent dream" — the simple wish-fulfilments of erotic images.
Rather, they use patients' dreams to explore their current preoccupations.
Charles Rycroft, an eminent contemporary British psychoanalyst, has gone so far as to reject entirely the Freudian theory of the origin and function of dreaming.
He argues that dreams cannot be regarded as a neurotic symptom if everyone dreams — unless everyone is neurotic.
Describing everyone as neurotic makes any distinction between normality and neurosis impossible.
In addition, the idea that infants are born with a totally maladaptive nervous system — capable only of primary process thinking — seems biological and evolutionary nonsense.
As he says, quoting from Freud's Introductory Lectures on Psycho-analysis, If we started life as "a chaos, a cauldron full of seething excitations" , with "no organization" and given to satisfying our wishes by hallucination, it is hard to imagine how we could begin to experience the external world in such a way as to learn adaptation from it.
This difficulty does not arise if one assumes that both processes co-exist from the beginning of life, that they both have adaptive functions, and they are not necessarily in conflict with one another— even though they may on occasion be.
Imagination and artistic creation are also, according to a strict interpretation of Freudian theory, neurotic symptoms.
Rycroft argues against relegating so much of our mental life to the status of pathology, preferring to liken dreams to waking imaginative activity, such as creative writing.
Metaphor and symbolism are intrinsic to both, and it seems only reasonable to attempt to treat dreaming as normal and creative unless good evidence emerges that it is indeed pathological.
Freud was a pioneer in taking dreaming seriously, and in recognizing that the quality of logic in dreams, while sometimes bizarre, may  follow certain rules.
His psychological theorizing developed throughout his life, but many of the assumptions he made can be traced to an early work, the "Project for a Scientific Psychology" .
This essay is, incidentally, unusually accessible for the lay reader as it does not rely on any familiarity with the technical terminology that he developed later.
In addition to addressing psychiatric issues, it also deals, very insightfully in most instances, with topics of general psychology such as primary memory and forgetting.
As a trained neurologist, Freud's psychological theory was essentially based in the neurophysiological thinking of his time.
McCarley and Hobson, in an analysis of Freud's psychological theory, have pointed out how deeply was his psychology informed by these neurological assumptions, which subsequent science has frequently shown to be wrong.
So far as dreaming is concerned, Freud's theory has similarly been overtaken by the evidence.
REM sleep — during which our most vivid dreams almost always occur — is universal among mammals, which makes it unlikely that its primary role is to be the vehicle for a neurotic defence mechanism, unless gorillas, dogs, cats and skunks are all credited with repressive superegos!
Neurophysiological studies have shown that REM sleep is an essential part of brain function — not an optional extra invoked to deal with unacceptable thoughts emerging during sleep.
(c) Some recent ideas
Rather than devoting any more space to criticizing a theory based on nineteenth-century science, it would seem more profitable to follow Freud's example in going to our current knowledge of the biological basis of sleep in building a psychological model of what dreaming really is.
Hobson and McCarley followed up their paper on the dated scientific underpinning for Freudian theory in general with an analysis of current knowledge of the neurophysiology of sleep, as applied to dreaming.
Following Freud in the spirit of a belief in the isomorphism of mind and body, they set out to do what he did, but in the light of modern findings about the physiology of sleep mechanisms.
Rather than dreaming primarily being psychologically necessary — a response dealing with occasional neurotic erotic impulses during sleep — they argued that it is in fact the outcome of an automatic, pre-programmed  neural process.
Like most good theories, theirs integrates a great accumulation of evidence which, once presented in a single context, makes the theory seem almost self-evident.
Relying largely on neurophysiological evidence, the argument for the theory is inevitably rather technical.
During REM sleep there is every indication that the cortex is highly active, although little external sensory stimulation is received by it.
In addition, although the motor cortex is highly active, generating activity which would normally result in movement, these commands do not reach the muscles controlling the limbs, but are "switched off" at a relay station at the top of the spinal column, so that we are effectively paralysed during REM sleep.
This explains the loss of tone in the neck muscles under the chin, used as one of the defining characteristics of REM sleep.
Not only is the cortex isolated by being unable to control the musculature, but there is also an inhibition of incoming signals generated by sensory systems.
That means perceptions of the "real" world are selectively attenuated.
The hindbrain and midbrain structures, normally associated with relaying sensory information to the cortex, spontaneously generate signals which are responsible for the cortical activation, and are also indistinguishable from signals which would normally have been relayed from the eyes and ears.
This activity is under the control of a periodic triggering mechanism in a structure at the top of the spinal column at the base of the brain known as the pontine brainstem.
Activity in giant cells in the pontine brainstem have been shown to precede eye movements in REM sleep in animals (or paradoxical sleep, as it is called in rodents and cats) while there is no evidence that cortical activity can influence these cells' discharges.
During REM sleep, they argued, the cortex is largely under the control of these random discharges from the hindbrain.
The interaction between stimulation from hindbrain structures normally associated with the transmission of sensory information, and cortical structures normally devoted to integrating sensory input of this sort, gives rise to dreaming.
They called this the activation-synthesis hypothesis of the dream process, and suggested that dreaming sleep may have a functional role in some aspect of the learning process.
This theory has been elaborated by Francis Crick and Graeme Mitchison.
REM or paradoxical sleep is universal among mammals.
In men, cats and rats, the prevention of REM sleep by selective  awakenings results in increased amounts of this sleep stage on recovery, as if what had been "missed" was then being "made up" , suggesting that not only does this sleep stage have its own drive mechanism, but it may have an important function.
Since most dreams are not remembered, this function must either have nothing whatever to do with dreaming, or, if dreaming is essential to the process, the forgetting must be a necessary part of it.
According to them the random pontine activity stimulating the cortex during REM sleep therefore has the function of erasing memories, which, in their terms, have become "parasitic" — interpretations which, whatever their origin, have no place in our latest view of the world and are redundant but persistent.
This accumulation of nonsense is expressed in dreams which are created only in order to be forgotten.
Those which are remembered are later repeated, so that frightening dreams which wake people up, and are remembered, tend to become recurrent.
The theory is supported by a mathematical model of the effects of random stimulation on very complex interactive systems, accounting for both bizarre and repetitive dreams.
It could be argued that selective forgetting of parasitic traces may have the opposite effect, on the memory system as a whole, of simply losing memories.
In a system as complex as human memory, the result of erasing what they call parasitic connections may have the effect of sharpening and making more accessible those cognitive structures which represent our worlds.
As such this theory may, m practical terms, have no quarrels with Hobson and McCarley's hypothesis that REM or dreaming sleep has a positive function in the learning process.
Hobson and McCarley's thesis has also been developed in a recent essay by Martin Seligman and Amy Yellen, whose title — "What is a dream?" — has been borrowed for this chapter.
Seligman and Yellen take the theory further, in mapping the psychological reality of dreaming on to contemporary neurophysiological evidence of brain functioning during sleep, accounting for the emotional quality of dreaming as well as its visual content.
They invoke three sources of evidence, closely following Hobson and McCarley's arguments to start with.
First, as they stated, the neurophysiological evidence suggests that the hindbrain is in control of the generation and maintenance of REM sleep.
Second, rapid eye movements are not continuous during REM, but  come in periodic bursts, typically lasting between two and ten seconds, and are separated by periods of sleep lasting up to three minutes with low voltage, mixed frequency EEG and muscle atonia.
Subjects woken during an REM burst have been shown by S. Molinari and David Foulkes to report highly vivid visual experiences much more frequently than when woken from periods of REM "quiescence" .
Categorizing these reports as being either "primary visual experiences" (PVEs) or "secondary cognitive elaborations" (SCEs) they found that 82 per cent of reports of mental activity when woken from REM bursts were PVEs, and 12 per cent SCEs; 80 per cent of reports after awakenings from REM quiescence were SCEs, while only 20 per cent were PVEs.
Subsequent work by David Foulkes and others, showed that the very striking differences between experience during REM bursts and REM quiescence was not as great when subjects were questioned at any length, rather than being allowed to make spontaneous reports of what had been going on in their minds.
It is, however, undeniable that there is a great difference in the quality of experience during REM bursts and REM quiescence, with visual and auditory hallucinatory sensations characterizing the REM bursts, even if the difference is not quite as striking as was first thought.
Given the two sources of evidence outlined above, it would not seem unreasonable to conclude that the discharges from the pontine brainstem are causing the dreams.
How is it that what seem like random discharges from a part of the brain that we share with the humblest reptiles can end up as the elaborate, coherent, cognitive activity we know as dreaming?
Seligman and Yellen invoke evidence showing how adept is the cortex in constructing sense out of chaos.
Like John Hughlings Jackson, with his Perceptual Release Theory discussed in the context of hypnagogic hallucinations, they argue that dreaming is the outcome of the cortical integration of sensory inputs over which it has no control.
In a survey of dreams reported by university students, they found that dream images which were highly vivid also tended to be "surprising" , and at the centre of the visual field.
They concluded,
These results suggest the existence of two different kinds of visual events during dreaming as we predicted.
One kind is vivid, detailed, colorful, large, and in the center of the visual field.
The  other kind is less vivid, less detailed, less colorful, smaller, and in the periphery of the visual field.
The detailed are more constrained and continuous with the plot.
We suggest that this is so because the vivid events are hallucinatory bursts whose content is unconstrained by the previous visual events, the ongoing emotion, or the ongoing integration; whereas the less vivid events are visual material generated by the cognitive integration, and as such, are constrained in content.
In a second study Seligman and Yellen compared the coherence of subjects' dream reports with their ability, while awake, to construct dream plots when shown a series of unconnected slides.
They predicted that those who integrated random visual events well in the waking state would also be those whose dream images were very constrained by the dream plot.
Those who integrated random visual events inadequately when awake would be those whose dream images fitted least well into their dream plots.
Strong positive correlations were indeed found between measures of the integration of images into dream plots with the integration of the unrelated slides into dream stories made up while awake, showing that their subjects had a consistent characteristic style of integration while awake and asleep.
They concluded, We suggest that the same process by which individuals make coherent the externally generated visual episodes of daily life is at work during dreaming; when an individual encounters the internally generated visual episodes in REM sleep, he deploys this ability (in whatever measure he possesses it) to make this encounter coherent.
This approach to the nature of dreaming is highly compelling.
Because it relies on continuing cognitive synthesis as a mechanism for the construction of dreams, it explains the apparently dreamlike quality of many experiences reported during NREM sleep, including hypnagogic imagery.
This description could be described in terms of Freud's dreamwork as a sort of cortical rearguard action in the face of incoherent but highly active discharges from the hindbrain.
In the last chapter dreams of exposure were described as dreams of shame, nightmares as dreams of fear, guilt or horror.
Is it similarly possible that these emotions are not a consequence of the dream but of the  apparently haphazard interaction between midbrain and hindbrain activity during REM sleep?
That is, just as cognitive synthesis is required to make sense of the input from the visual cortex, so it is needed to comprehend the intense emotions being offered to the cortex by overstimulated midbrain limbic structures.
One problem that remains is to explain the recurring dream — if the stimulation from the hindbrain pontine structures is truly random, how is it that people can have the same dreams repeatedly?
If there is such continuity between waking skills in integrating visual material and in the coherence of dream reports, why is it that "dream logic" follows rules of its own, characteristic of Bleuler's "A-thinking" or Freud's primary process thinking?
Would waking subjects really respond to dream images in the same way as when asleep?
These questions must remain unanswered, but this strategy for understanding the nature of dreaming represents the most promising yet suggested.
Our knowledge of the neurophysiology of sleep is highly advanced, while our psychological understanding of dreaming is very limited.
If we accept an isomorphism between brain states and mental functioning, taking some account of neurophysiological evidence must represent the most promising approach to understanding dreaming.
Psychophysiology of Sleep
Sleep Disturbance
(a) The effects of sleep deprivation
THE EXPERIENCE OF SLEEP LOSS: HEROIC EXPERIMENTS
Oliver Goldsmith, in his Natural History, described the effects of sleep loss thus: But man is more feeble; he requires its due return; and if it fails to pay the accustomed visit, his whole frame is in a short time thrown into disorder; his appetite ceases; his spirits are dejected; his pulse becomes quicker and harder; and his mind, abridged of its slumbering visions, begins to adopt waking dreams.
A thousand strange phantoms arise, which come and go without his will: these, which are transient in the beginning, at last take firm possession of the mind, which yields to their dominion, and, after a long struggle, runs into continued madness.
In that horrid state, the mind may be considered as a city without walls, open to every insult, and paying homage to every invader; every idea that then starts with any force, becomes a reality; and the reason, over fatigued with its former importunities, makes no head against the tyrannical invasion, but submits to it from mere imbecility.
Characteristically, he does not cite any source for this assertion.
This quotation does, however, sum up what many people might expect of the consequences of going without sleep for any length of time.
Floridly psychotic episodes in people's lives, when they experience hallucinations of the sort Goldsmith describes, are often preceded by periods of sleeplessness, or at least of gross sleep disturbance, and this is perhaps why the association between sleep loss and madness has  been made.
It does not necessarily follow that sleep loss would cause these symptoms in otherwise normal individuals.
Relatively few controlled observations of the effects of sleep loss have continued for longer than forty-eight hours.
When they have, disorders of perception including hallucinations have sometimes been reported, but by no means invariably.
A not untypical pattern of distortion of sensation was reported from the first documented vigil of this sort:
The first subject, J.A.G., is a young man of 28 years, assistant professor in the University.
He is unmarried, of perfect health, of nervous temperament, of very great vitality and activity.
He is accustomed to about 8 hours of sound sleep from 10 pm. to 6 am.
He awoke at his usual time Wednesday morning, November 27, and remained awake until 12 o'clock Saturday night.
The second night he did not feel well and suffered severely from sleepiness.
The third night he suffered less.
The fourth day and the evening following he felt well and was able to pass his time in his usual occupations.
During the last 50 hours, however, he had to be watched closely, and could not be allowed to sit down unoccupied, as he showed a tendency to fall asleep immediately, his own will to keep awake being of no avail.
The daily rhythm was well marked.
During the afternoon and evening the subject was less troubled with sleepiness.
The sleepy period was from midnight until noon, of which the worst part was about dawn.
The most marked effect of the abstinence from sleep with this subject was the presence of hallucinations of sight.
These were persistent after the second night.
The subject complained that the floor was covered with a greasy-looking, molecular layer of rapidly moving or oscillating particles.
Often this layer was a foot above the floor and parallel with it and this caused the subject trouble walking, as he would try to step up on it.
Later the air was full of these dancing particles which developed into swarms of little bodies like gnats, but colored red, purple or black.
The subject would climb upon a chair to brush them from about the gas jet or stealthily try to touch an imaginary fly on the table with his finger.
These phenomena did not move with movements of the eye and appeared to be true hallucinations, centrally caused, but due  no doubt to the long and unusual strain put upon the eyes.
Meanwhile the subject's sharpness of vision was not impaired.
At no other time has he had hallucinations of sight and they entirely disappeared after sleeping.
Two more subjects then repeated the 90-hour vigil, and similarly became extremely sleepy, especially during the hours between midnight and noon, reviving somewhat during the afternoons.
They did not experience any of the hallucinations experienced by J.A.G.
In a later experiment conducted at the UCLA Neuropsychiatric Institute four volunteers underwent 205 hours (eight days) of sleeplessness.
They became increasingly sleepy for the first four days until it became almost impossible for the experimenters to keep them awake.
Making them responsible for keeping each other awake at this stage restored a sense of group cohesion and of common purpose, although from this point on some serious changes in behaviour seem to have occurred, marked by emotional outbursts, grossly impolite eating habits and what the authors of the report describe as an "infantilization of personal habits…including toilet and bathing activities" .
At one point one of the subjects went berserk during a psychomotor tracking task, screaming in terror and pulling off his electrodes, falling to the floor and sobbing and muttering incoherently about a gorilla.
Oddly enough, at the end of the 205 hours the subjects claimed that they could go on longer, that after the fifth day things had got easier, and indeed offered to stay awake for another day if paid at the ninth day's rate.
In the forty-odd experimental studies that have been reported to date on periods of sleep loss longer than two days, hallucinations have been uncommon, tending to affect individuals in solitary vigils, rather than those in groups.
Similarly, other frankly psychiatric symptoms, such as of paranoia, have affected lone volunteers more than those selected to be in groups.
A study in which the majority of the subjects suffered from mental aberrations of one sort or another required them to perform tasks continuously, and in isolation, for forty-two hours.4 Three of these ten subjects experienced actual hallucinations, and seven of them suffered perceptual distortions or illusions.
Two other groups of ten subjects were allowed either six one-hour naps or one six-hour nap during the  experiment, and they both managed to maintain a high level of performance on the tasks.
Even in these groups, however, a minority had hallucinations.
It is well known that isolation in itself, with no sleep loss, can induce hallucinatory experiences, and it seems that in this experiment the effects of sleep loss potentiated the relatively mild levels of isolation imposed on the subjects.
In these experiments subjects have invariably found it most difficult to remain awake in the hours between midnight and noon, with a revival every afternoon.
In addition, it typically becomes very difficult indeed to keep people continually awake without keeping them moving, and this naturally confounds the effects of physical fatigue with those of sleep deprivation per se (although purposely increasing exercise levels during a vigil does not seem to increase or decrease the impairments attributable to sleep loss).
After about seventy-two hours of sleep loss, "it is impossible to prevent subjects from obtaining brief" microsleeps "" which (when EEG measures are made) have been shown to be indistinguishable from brief periods of natural sleep.
Using Dement's analogy, rather than taking their sleep in one meal, subjects may achieve enough to keep going by snatching "snacks" .
Such heroic experiments therefore show a diminishing return in giving insight into the effects of loss of sleep, although they have demonstrated that it is an intensely stressful experience, taxing the psychological resources of individuals to their utmost.
EFFECTS ON PERFORMANCE AND PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGY
The sleep-deprived person may feel terrible and look pretty ragged but is typically capable of achieving the same levels of performance on psychological tests as when rested.
Many common tests of perceptual functioning, memory or skilled performance seem insensitive to the effects of sleep loss.
Despite a good number of studies having been undertaken in the first half of the century it was not until the late 1950s that the particular decrements in performance of sleepy subjects were established.
Researchers at the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research in the United States and at the Medical Research Council Unit for Applied Psychology in Cambridge simultaneously identified the tasks sensitive to the effects of even one night's loss of sleep as those which were not self-timed, which went on for at least ten  minutes and which were not intrinsically motivating.
While a sleep-deprived subject at the Walter Reed Institute was able to respond as quickly in a simple reaction-time task as when rested, his pattern of responses over an extended series of trials, with the experimenter determining when stimuli were to be presented, would include an increasing number of very slow responses.
The Cambridge subjects were faced with the five-choice serial reaction task, where a subject responds to one of five lights coming on by pressing one of five buttons on a continuous basis (every time a response is made the relevant light goes out, but another one immediately comes on).
Average response speed tended to decrease over a period of twenty minutes in sleep-deprived subjects, unlike in rested controls.
Their best (fastest) responses were, however, just as fast as when rested, although the number of slow responses (or gaps in responding) increased dramatically after the first five minutes.
The effects of sleep deprivation were therefore not simple.
For instance, one could not say that the nervous system had simply slowed down, as on occasion the subjects could produce responses as quickly as they could when rested.
The theory developed to account for these findings, Lapse Theory, proposed that the special effect of sleep loss was to increase the number of lapses in attention, possibly through "microsleeps" .
This attentional failure may be caused by a lowering of arousal level, which may be temporarily counteracted by the subject exerting special efforts to remain awake.
Evidence supporting the theory has come from experiments on the interaction of sleep loss with other manipulations known to increase arousal level, such as incentives and noise.
Giving the subject an immediate knowledge of the results of a monotonous task provides an intrinsic incentive, which can be sufficient to overcome completely the effects of one night's sleep loss for brief periods.
This improvement is achieved by the subjects' making an extra compensatory effort, measurable in terms of increased muscle tension (EMG).
In these subjects, the level of EMG has been shown to be well correlated with their level of performance.
Offering extra payment for good performance, and "fines" for missed signals in a vigilance task similarly maintained performance after one night's sleep loss at normal levels.
This was not maintained after a second night, and after the third night without sleep subjects provided with these  incentives could perform no better than those not provided with incentives.
Loud noise impairs performance on the five-choice serial reaction time task in normal, rested subjects.
This has been interpreted as increasing arousal to levels incompatible with that task.
Sleep-deprived subjects, however, improve their performance on the five-choice when subjected to white noise, as if arousal level in their cases was being raised sufficiently to allow them to cope with the demands of the task.
Lapse Theory can be invoked to explain all the results described above, but it remains unclear whether the lapses in attention induced by lowered arousal are the only important symptoms of sleep loss.
For instance, are the fast reaction-times of the sleep-deprived subject really as fast as those when they are rested, and is the slightly slower average reaction-time simply the result of a number of isolated lapses?
Analysis of the moment-by-moment changes in performance over a ten-minute period has shown that while the sleep-deprived subject may be performing well at the beginning, all responses are slowed towards the end, as well as frank lapses occurring.
In a boring, repetitive task these subjects are not only prone to occasional failures to respond, but their "good" responses are also impaired.
According to the Swedish psychologist A.Kjellberg, lapses are the most dramatic outcomes of lowered arousal, but as the sleepy subject is performing a work-paced task for any length of time his responses become degraded even before the occurrence of frank lapses in attention.
This explanation of sleep loss effects in terms of lowered arousal is further supported by studies on selective attention.
Loud noise (usually delivered as "white noise" — a wide-band mixture of tones, sounding like a monotonous hiss as from a N set unconnected to an aerial) is a potent arouser, and in rested subjects it has the effect of focusing attention in a dual component task.
This involves tracking a moving dot as well as monitoring lights which are either centrally or peripherally placed.
When performing this same task for forty minutes after sleep loss subjects began by showing faster responses to the centrally placed lights than the peripheral ones, like rested subjects.
They gradually demonstrated more and more evidence of a defocusing of attention as the task went on, consistent with the view that although performance was not disrupted by lapses, habituation was leading to a  marked drop in arousal level in these subjects.
Sleep-deprived subjects have similarly been found to be easily distracted by irrelevant stimuli in a card-sorting task, again demonstrating a failure to maintain focused attention on the job in hand.
The EEC is probably the best single indicator of cortical arousal at low levels.
Recordings of sleep-deprived subjects have shown a reduction in the amplitude of alpha rhythms.
This is consistent with the view that their struggle to stay awake is not necessarily punctuated with periods of somnolence, or microsleeps, but shows a compelling tendency to slip down the arousal continuum.
In rested subjects alpha rhythm is indicative of low arousal, but sleep-deprived subjects commonly only achieve this level of arousal at best.
Alpha appears when they are performing the most demanding tasks, and disappears altogether when less is demanded of them and their eyes are closed — almost as if they were drifting into a light sleep.
Recordings of EEC while sleep-deprived subjects have been engaged in tasks have disclosed that errors of commission are not associated with EEC patterns different from those during correct performance, while errors of omission (indicating failure to maintain attention) are associated with reduced alpha.
In addition, slow waves consistent with being asleep may occur during lapses in performance.
This evidence, again, is consistent with the lapse theory of sleep loss.
Further EEC evidence comes from studies of the contingent negative variation (CNV)— a negative waveform in the EEC which is elicited when a warning stimulus is given, shortly followed by an imperative stimulus which requires the subject to make a response.
For instance, a buzzer will sound, followed one second later by a series of flashes of light, which the subject has to turn off by pressing a button.
Sleep-deprived subjects have been shown to have lower amplitude CNVs, and it could be assumed that this is associated with inattention or poor preparation for making a response.
In rested subjects, the relationship between response speed and CNV amplitude is not simple, but one might assume that if lapses of attention are responsible for the generally lowered CNV with sleep loss, these should be associated with slow responses, when the subject was ill-prepared for the second, imperative stimulus, having failed to notice the warning stimulus.
According to a simple application of lapse theory, slow responses ought to be preceded by low voltage CNVs, while fast  responses (as quick as when rested) should be preceded by high voltage CNVs similar to those recorded from rested subjects.
Studies carried out in Hull, did nothing to confirm this prediction.
Both fast and slow responses were slower after sleep loss.
Paradoxically, while CNV amplitude was on average lower after sleep deprivation, sleep-deprived subjects produced higher voltage CNVs before the 8 slowest responses out of 60 trials than the 8 fastest ones.
The same subjects when rested had higher voltage CNVs before fast responses than slow ones.
These results reinforce Kjellberg's contention that the sleep-deprived person is not, as a strong version of lapse theory would suggest, essentially "normal" but suffering periodic lapses.
Rather, the subject's psychophysiological state undergoes a profound change; the resultant of compelling sleepiness inducing inertia and sleep, and a determined effort to stay awake.
Neither a simple arousal model nor lapse theory is adequate on its own to explain the complex effects of sleep loss.
EFFECTS OF SLEEP LOSS ON SUBSEQUENT SLEEP
It is a commonplace observation that if we lose a night's sleep we tend to sleep a bit longer on subsequent nights, as if to make up a "sleep debt" .
Generally speaking, the amount of sleep lost is not made up for entirely on the recovery nights.
Recordings of the EEC of recovery sleep have confirmed that the first night's recovery sleep is longer than usual.
There is a great increase in percentage terms of Stages 3 and 4, sleep, at the expense of the lighter slow wave sleep stages.
While more REM sleep is taken than on control nights in absolute terms, this is not because of any increase in REM sleep as a percentage of total sleep.
Only during the second and subsequent recovery nights do subjects typically show a relative elevation of REM sleep percentage levels.
Thus, over the course of two or three nights Stages 3,4 and REM sleep are almost made up, while Stage 2 sleep is not.
(b) Schedules of sleep
REDUCED SLEEP IN THE SHORT-TERM
Once the tasks which are particularly sensitive to the effects of even one night's loss of sleep had been identified, it became feasible to attempt to establish how little sleep is enough to prevent any of the  effects of sleep loss.
Experiments such as one conducted at the MRC Applied Psychology Unit in Cambridge have indicated that even short periods of sleep are enough to prevent any measurable worsening of performance.
In that experiment 19 enlisted men were repeatedly tested over a period of six weeks.
Every week their sleep was rationed on two nights to between 0 and 7.5 hours, and they spent the subsequent days being tested in the laboratory on vigilance and adding tasks.
These tasks were repetitive, lengthy, and lacking in any intrinsic interest.
This regime should have been more than adequate to demonstrate any significant short-term effects of reduced sleep.
However, performance deficits were only noticeable after 2 hours sleep or less for one night, and after 5 hours or less for two successive nights, showing some evidence of an accumulation of sleep debt potentiating the otherwise rather slight effects of reduced sleep.
This finding, that reduced sleep in the short-term has little effect on performance, was subsequently confirmed in later work.
The effect of interrupting sleep after two or three hours is to deny the subjects almost all REM sleep, while allowing them much of the deep slow wave sleep that they might be expected to have in a normal night.
Only sleep stage deprivation experiments can answer the question whether one stage or another is more restorative, and these are discussed next.
SLEEP-STAGE DEPRIVATION EXPERIMENTS
Selective deprivation experiments involve highly artificial regimes designed systematically to eliminate one or other of the major sleep stages.
They will be discussed again in Chapter 10 in relation to hypothesized functions of sleep, but the effects on subsequent recovery sleep, and the consequences for performance tasks will be outlined here.
REM sleep-deprivation experiments were also discussed in Chapter 4 in the context of beliefs about dreaming — in particular, the notion that the prevention of dreaming sleep might cause temporary psychosis.
Briefly, William Dement's early experimental work which provided some support for this idea was subsequently found, both by himself and others, to be unrepeatable.
In retrospect, it seems that genuine concern on the part of the experimenters was communicated to the subjects to provide a potent source of suggestion that they should suffer symptoms of paranoia and  hallucinations, and a cumulative sleep loss over the six days of the experiment combined to provide a fertile ground for the production of these symptoms.
It has also become clear that dreaming is by no means confined to REM sleep (see Chapter 5), so even if the theory was correct, the regime of REM sleep deprivation would not have been an adequate test of it.
Well-established aspects of the early results relate to the behaviour of sleep mechanisms when REM sleep is prevented by repeated wakenings.
While it may be virtually abolished on the first night by as few as four or five wakenings, on subsequent nights REM "pressure" increases, and successively more wakenings are required, as the number of times REM sleep is initiated is increased.
In addition, on recovery nights the amount of time spent in REM sleep increases.
This REM sleep "rebound" may be of the order of 50 per cent over baseline levels, although the total amount of REM sleep "lost" during the period of selective deprivation is rarely made up entirely.
It is also possible to prevent subjects from having any Stage 4 sleep (or very little) by disturbing their sleep with loud noises, rather than waking them up fully.
The effects of this regime on subsequent recovery sleep are similar to the effects of REM sleep deprivation, in that a rebound of about 50 per cent occurs on recovery nights.
In two experiments combining total sleep deprivation, Stage REM deprivation and Stage 4 sleep deprivation, Julie Moses and others at the US Navy Health Research Center in San Diego have compared the effects of a variety of regimes of total and selective sleep deprivation on recovery sleep and performance.
Subjects were first denied any sleep at all for two nights, and then allowed to sleep under one or other sleep-stage deprivation condition.
In this way the restorative effects of sleep without Stage REM could be compared with those of sleep without Stage 4.
Another group of subjects were subjected to REM or Stage 4 sleep deprivation for three nights, and then deprived of sleep altogether for one night, again allowing a comparison of the effects of a four-day cumulation of loss of Stage 4 sleep with REM sleep.
Whether recovery sleep after two nights loss of sleep was restricted by excluding Stage 4 sleep or most of REM sleep seemed to make no difference — subjects returned to pre-sleep-loss levels of performance regardless of whether recovery sleep was uninterrupted or selectively  deprived.
In their other experiment neither selective deprivation of Stage 4 or REM over three nights had any measurable effects on performance, and after the subsequent night of total sleep deprivation there was no difference between groups in their degree of impairment.
In fact their performance was slightly better than a control group of subjects who had one night's sleep deprivation with no prior selective deprivation.
These results suggest that any sleep is enough to prevent the failures of attention which worsen performance on the tasks which are most sensitive to the effects of loss of sleep.
What are the particular psychological effects, if any, of selective deprivation of REM or paradoxical sleep?
Research on this question has concentrated on the possible role of REM sleep in facilitating adaptive processes, and in the consolidation of memories.
Evidence relating to these issues will be discussed in Chapter 10.
REDUCED SLEEP IN THE LONG-TERM
As has been pointed out elsewhere (see Chapter 2), some people seem to require very little sleep, and some take more.
Those who sleep less sometimes claim to do so by choice, self-righteously accusing everyone else of being idle who spend more than six hours in bed.
How much control do we have over our requirements for sleep, and what are the consequences of individuals taking things into their own hands and reducing their sleep?
The effects of reducing sleep on sleep patterns have been studied in a number of relatively short experiments, and one which went on for two years.
The short-term effects are illustrated by an experiment in which sleep was restricted to five hours for seven days.
Sleep onset time was reduced from 33 minutes during baseline recordings to less than 5 minutes by the seventh night, and time spent awake after going to sleep was reduced from about 30 minutes to virtually zero.
Sleep efficiency was thus notably improved.
While asleep, Stages 1, 2 and REM were reduced at the expense of Stages 3 and 4, which were maintained at baseline levels.
There was a tendency for REM sleep time to recover slightly during the week of restriction, and during recovery sleep an increase in REM sleep time over baseline levels (an REM sleep rebound) indicated an accumulated pressure for REM sleep.
These subjects slept like short sleepers in so far as sleep efficiency was improved, and deep slow wave sleep was maintained at  baseline levels.
Their REM sleep time was however reduced.
Longer-term effects were studied in four young couples, three who normally slept about 8 hours every night, and one who slept 6.5 hours a night, who volunteered to attempt to reduce their sleep progressively to 4.5 hours a night over a period of between six and eight months.
They reduced their time in bed by 30 minutes every two weeks until it was down to 6.5 hours, then by 30 minutes every three weeks until it was 5 hours, and finally by 30 minutes every 4 weeks.
At the final stage, sleeping only 4.5 hours a night, problems arose with subjects complaining of falling asleep during the day, and the reductions in time allowed in bed were discontinued.
Subjective reports on the effects of reduced sleep were that it produced a chronic feeling of sleepiness (as measured by the Stanford Sleepiness Scale questionnaire), and, perhaps not surprisingly, increased the feeling of needing more sleep.
The estimated time to get to sleep after going to bed was reduced to a quarter of the baseline levels, and reports of difficulty in getting to sleep were reduced to a third of what they had been.
More subtle effects on mood are indicated by a quotation from one of the subjects: "I get discouraged more easily, slightly depressed about overcoming difficulties, very much like when I am sick with a cold." 
Despite the reports of sleepiness during the day, performance of tasks known to be affected by sleep loss was generally unaffected during this regime (including two tasks developed at the Medical Research Council Applied Psychology Unit, the Wilkinson Auditory Vigilance Task and the Wilkinson Addition Task).
Only one test proved sensitive to the effects of gradually reduced sleep — the Rapid Alternation Test — where an increase in the number of long responses, or lapses, was noticed at the lowest sleep levels.
Subjects also reported difficulties in maintaining concentration when driving.
After this phase of the experiment was over, subjects were allowed to sleep as much as they wished, but continued to keep sleep diaries for a year.
The six who originally slept about 8 hours did not immediately return to their baseline level, and continued to sleep less than they had before, and even a year later they were sleeping 1 to 1.5 hours less than when they started.
The two subjects who slept little to start with did not achieve any such permanent reduction in sleep.
This experiment is interesting in highlighting how the subjective experience of sleepiness  is not necessarily reflected in performance measures, and more importantly in demonstrating some permanent change in the sleep patterns of the group of six "normal" sleepers.
This study included EEG/EOG recordings during sleep, and it is interesting to compare the sort of sleep that these subjects were getting after months of sleep reduction with subjects who have reduced sleep for briefer periods of time.
In particular, did the regime permanently change their patterning of sleep, as well as reducing their sleep requirement by over an hour?
Comparing the 8-hour with the 5.5-hour sleep regimes for the six subjects who had normally taken 8 hours sleep.
Stages 2 and REM were significantly reduced, while Stage 4 sleep actually increased slightly.
Although REM sleep time was reduced, its proportion of the first 5.5 hours sleep was increased in the 5.5-hour sleep condition.
That is, there was evidence of some compensation, partly due to a shorter time to the onset of REM sleep.
On follow-up, when these subjects were sleeping only 6 hours but not feeling sleepy any more during the day, the proportions of sleep stages were no different from the period in the experiment when they were being restricted to 6 hours' sleep (when this restriction did mace them feel sleepy).
In a less ambitious sleep-reduction study, three pairs of subjects systematically reduced their sleep from 8 to 6 hours over a period of six weeks.
Recordings of sleep patterns again showed that this was achieved at the expense of REM and Stage 2 sleep, leaving Stage 4 sleep levels unaffected.
As in the longer experiment, the subjects tended to sleep less during a three-month follow-up, indicating that even relatively short periods of training may be sufficient to reduce sleep requirements by an hour or so in individuals who wish to do so.
How much sleep do we actually "need" ?
The two subjects in the eight-month restriction study who had already limited themselves to 6 hours did not benefit from the regime, and reverted to their own established norms.
Many of us who take 7 hours or more may be able to cope with less sleep without feeling sleepy, given training, but only those of us who were sleeping more than we really "needed" to.
On the other hand, there is evidence that, given the opportunity of "ad lib" sleep, most young adults will sleep longer than usual, the extra sleep being composed of Stages I, 2 and REM sleep.
Does this imply a chronic sleep debt in these young people?
Perhaps not, but while the  7–9 hour sleeping habit is certainly based on physiological need, it seems to be a socially defined and somewhat procrustean norm imposed on all of us whatever our individual needs, which are probably genetically determined.
EXTENDED SLEEP, DISPLAYED SLEEP, AND THE RIP VAN WINKLE EFFECT
Somewhat surprisingly, the consequences of sleeping longer than usual are similar to sleeping less, so far as performance decrements are concerned.
John Taub and others at the University of California School of Medicine required subjects to sleep an hour or more longer than usual, by putting them to bed at either II p.m. or I a.m., but getting them up at the same time — 9 a.m.
They found that the effects on sleep were to increase the total amount of REM sleep and Stage 2 sleep.
When tested after two hours' extra sleep, subjects performed worse on a vigilance task, although not significantly worse on a calculation task.
In another experiment when sleep was extended by a similar amount, subjects were tested on a vigilance task, a calculation task and a pinball game.
The combined number of omissions and false reports on the vigilance task were 50 per cent greater after extended sleep, and scores on pinball were reduced by 10 per cent.
Again, there was no significant decrement on a calculation task.
This group of researchers went on to compare the effect of extended sleep with reduced sleep (5 hours), and with displaced sleep, when subjects slept from either 9 p.m. to 5 a.m. or 3 a.m. to 11 a.m.
Both shifting the timing of the sleep period from the habitual 12 p.m. to 8 a.m. and either increasing or decreasing the total amount of sleep had similar effects in reducing accuracy and speed of response on a vigilance task.
They attributed these effects to physiological changes resulting from the disruption of the habitual circadian cycle of sleep and wakefulness, rather than any direct effects of the regimes on sleep itself — correlations between actual amounts of sleep achieved and their performance and mood measures were poor.
The consequences of sleep loss and sleep reduction cannot therefore simply be interpreted in terms of denial of sleep, but must be regarded as the outcome of a combination of sleep loss, causing sleepiness, and the subversion of the normally well-ordered physiological cycles which substantially control our states of arousal.
Implications of this conclusion will be further explored in the section on shiftworking.
(c) Practical implications of sleep loss
Apart from any implications for theories of sleep function in physiology, results from experiments on the effects of sleep deprivation have some practical importance.
All of us lose sleep at some time in our lives, and many individuals have to lose sleep as part of their jobs, which may be extremely responsible and demanding.
Shiftworkers lose sleep progressively while working the night or morning shifts, and may be employed in nursing, in controlling power stations or chemical plants, as well as in manufacturing industries.
Airline pilots commonly have difficulty in sleeping properly after long flights, especially when there have been time-zone changes.
Young babies inflict substantial disruption on their mother's sleep in their first three months of life, when they are at their most dependent, when the mother's judgement and good temper are most important.
Junior hospital doctors may be on call for extended periods and on occasions have to manage with little or no sleep.
It is commonplace for soldiers to get very little sleep indeed during a battle.
In all these contexts there are high demands on individuals for effective and responsible behaviour, and it becomes crucial to know what precise effects sleep loss has had on normal functioning.
OVERWORK
When junior hospital doctors have been asked whether their efficiency was impaired by their long hours of duty, over a third replied "often" and almost half replied "occasionally" .
These doctors frequently have the sole responsibility for assessing the needs of patients who are brought to hospitals, for instance to casualty wards, in the middle of the night.
Tests of efficiency in detecting abnormalities in the electrocardiogram have shown that after a night of reduced sleep doctors were reliably worse.
In taking a patient's history the doctor has to listen carefully to what the patient says, which may be incoherent, and extract from this account the elements which are medically relevant.
This very important task involves a high memory load, as items mentioned by a patient  early in the interview may turn out to be significant later on.
Tests of medical house doctors after a night spent on emergency admissions (when they got an average of 1.5 hours' sleep) showed them to be significantly worse at a memory task designed to tap these skills than after a night off duty.
The differences between doctors were very great, not only in their general level of performance, but in the degree to which their level of performance was affected by the lack of sleep.
Referring to recent studies indicating that some people are particularly vulnerable to the effects of sleep disruption, the authors of this report suggested that work should be done to identify those doctors who are most at risk, in order to assign them to other duties.
How does sleep loss affect the soldier?
A study carried out at the Army Personnel Research Establishment (APRE) in Farnborough simulated wartime conditions for ten soldiers, who were required to defend a position during a tactical exercise lasting ten days.
Military staff ensured that they had no sleep for the first three days, after which short periods of sleep (4 hours) were permitted every twenty-four hours.
As well as being kept extremely busy with military duties (digging trenches, receiving signals, countering surprise attacks by "enemy troops" ) the men were tested three times a day on logical reasoning, a decoding task, and marksmanship.
Logical reasoning and decoding both got worse by the end of three days, and significantly recovered, almost to baseline levels, when 4 hours sleep a night was allowed.
Marksmanship was relatively unaffected when the soldiers were allowed to shoot in their own time at a target, but when shooting was combined with a vigilance task (with the target appearing briefly at unpredictable times), the number of hits was dramatically reduced.
In a larger study assessing endurance over nine days under different levels of sleep loss, the APRE reported that with no sleep at all soldiers could only operate effectively for four days, while with I.5 hours' sleep a day 50 per cent of a platoon lasted nine days in the field, and nearly all of a platoon allowed 3 hours sleep completed the nine-day exercise.
The same pattern of performance decrements on cognitive and shooting tasks was observed as in the smaller experiment.
This combination of good marksmanship with poor reasoning ability can only be described as alarming — in particular when so many military duties may be concerned with public order, as in Northern Ireland, where rules of engagement require the soldier to make decisions on the basis of  evidence that is often ambiguous.
To quote the Duke of Wellington, "I don't know what effect these men will have upon the enemy, but, by God, they terrify me." 
SHIFTWORK
Shiftworkers commonly complain of not being able to get enough sleep and of feeling chronically sleepy.
This problem is not confined to night-workers, but also affects those on early shift (6 am. to 2 p.m.) who may have to allow an hour to get to work.
Summarizing the results of a number of studies, Andrew Tilley and his co-authors have described the effects of shiftwork on sleep as being:(I) A one- to two-hour reduction in the duration of the main sleep period for the night shift and a reduction of about one hour for a morning or early shift.
(2) An increase in the total amount of sleep per 24 hr, as compared with that of non-shift workers.
This increase, however, can be attributed to long naps taken outside the main sleep period and increased sleep time on rest days.
Both effects suggest a compensatory response to shorter main sleep periods.
(3) A change in the quality of sleep (i.e. more time awake, increased Stage I, and sometimes reduced REM) and a disruption of the normal temporal organization of the sleep stages during daytime sleep.
In their own study which actually involved recording EEG/EOG measures of sleeping shiftworkers in their own homes using a portable tape recorder, they also found that sleep during the day was generally shorter than night-time sleep, and more frequently interrupted by awakenings.
The consequences for the performance of simple tasks was that simple and choice reaction times were worse at night than during the day, and that as days on the night shift went by, simple reaction time tasks became slower.
Circadian (twenty-four hour) fluctuations in performance thus seem to combine with the effects of a cumulative sleep loss in a cycle of degradation of efficiency on the night shift.
Some individuals take to shiftworking with no problems while others find the regime intolerable.
Simon Folkard and Tim Monk have suggested that it may be the individuals whose rhythms do adjust to the  regime who experience the most difficulty.
By recording body temperatures throughout the day of groups of well-adjusted shiftworkers, intolerant shiftworkers, and day-workers who had given up shiftwork because they could not tolerate it, Reinberg has demonstrated that it is indeed the best-adjusted group whose circadian rhythm was most immutable.
Intolerant workers tended to show cycles longer or shorter than twenty-four hours when they were on shifts, although they had normal twenty-four cycles when they had returned to day-work.
As with the effects of sleep reduction, sleep displacement or increased sleep on their own, the effect of shiftworking on performance and mood are a consequence of the interaction of our innate biological rhythms with sleep and arousal mechanisms.
The implication of the Reinberg group's work is that rapidly rotating shifts, where no adjustment is made in terms of body rhythms, are preferable to longer cycled systems.
Monitoring the body temperature of shiftworkers might also give early warning of shiftwork intolerance, allowing transfers to day-work before performance has deteriorated.