

1 The art of advertising and public relations
 "Judicious questioning is the half of knowledge" 
In its basic meaning communication is the passing of information, ideas, and attitudes from person to person or group to group.
When you say, "Do you understand me?" , you are really asking if you have successfully communicated to the other person what you had in mind.
Some communicate better than others.
Some people, such as writers, dancers, and painters, are so gifted that their communication becomes art.
While these means of human communication are fundamental to our culture, other technological means of communication such as television, radio and computers have become so powerful and specialized that they can greatly influence how we perceive and accept new information.
In this way, the very means of communication itself and not just what is being communicated — the message — is becoming a dynamic cultural force.
But is this so strange?
After all the way in which you talk to someone greatly determines how they will understand your message.
By choosing a career in advertising or public relations you will be in this complex and exciting business of communication.
Once upon a time, say until the late 1960s, advertising and public relations were skills that called for good writing ability, a flair for commerce, art talents, a large degree of personal charm and verbal fluency, and a sociable nature.
To some extent advertising was something of a gentleman's game.
As for public relations, who could dislike for long the public relations man with his gin and tonic in hand, carnation in his button-hole, and soothing, helpful words?
All that has long since changed and, while talent can still win the day, both fields are down to the hard graft of making money.
The leading — and final — question nowadays is always about profits and commercial growth.
 "What is the bottom line?" as they say.
With agencies quoted on the Stock Exchange with turnover into the hundreds of millions, advertising is big business.
Public relations, a real growth service industry, is not far behind.
No doubt many people in advertising and public relations, as well as their professional associations, will protest that their work is not all about making money and that they do care about the communications they create and the messages they send to the public.
Of course, this is true; nevertheless, mark well the following advice if you want a career in these fields.
Without these basics your road will be rocky, if indeed you manage to get on it:
If you are interested in advertising, then first be interested in business.
If you are interested in public relations, then first get educated.
What is advertising?
Advertising is simply the action of drawing public attention to goods, services, events, or to whatever you want them to pay attention.
Therefore, it is hardly a modern notion.
The old town  crier was an advertiser.
The painted inn sign, the poster saying "vote for me" are advertisements.
Advertising today is a highly specialised business which owes its development to the continuous advance in mass communication and in manufacture — even if at its heart it still is drawing public attention to something.
In Britain advertising was unsophisticated until the mid-nineteenth century.
Indeed, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries it suffered an almost total collapse because of the imposition of a tax levied according to the value of goods advertised.
The Industrial Revolution changed all that — it saw the start of mass production and, with it, the rotary printing press enabled newspapers to extend their circulations.
There were more goods to buy, more people with enough money to buy them and easier ways to communicate with them.
Manufacturers soon realised the power of advertising their goods.
The demand for space grew and spaces had to be booked.
Agents began to charge to perform this function.
This probably led to the practice which still exists of advertising agencies buying space in newspapers (or time on television) and receiving a commission from the media owner.
Perhaps it isn't surprising that this system still continues.
Both the newspaper and the advertising agency have a vested interest in encouraging advertising.
In advertising, you are part of the most rapidly developing new industry in the world, namely communications and  information technology.
In one breath you are claiming the wall poster advertisement of the ancient Romans and the newest satellite in space as your very own tools of trade.
In either advertising or public relations you will work for many clients with a multitude of problems and try to offer them solutions.
You will deal with the specialized skills of hundreds of others in the service industries from art houses to printers to script writers to computer programmer wizards.
No wonder so many young people want to get into advertising or public relations, for it can be an exciting and rewarding career.
But getting to be one of these fashionable high-flying image makers with a top salary is hard going.
You must have that "something extra" — not just to make it to the top but to get employed in the first place.
The development of these powerful new means of communication and the accompanying development of personnel highly skilled in them has expanded the means of control of information as well as its dissemination.
To control and manage communications is something that politicians and governments, both east and west, work hard to master — much as they may  publicly deny it.
Newspapers, magazines and TV stations could not survive without advertising revenue.
Advertising helps pay for the feature writer or the TV programme you most enjoy.
Even into the twentieth century advertisements were do-it-yourself affairs.
Manufacturers wrote their own copy and it appears very naive now.
The advertising agency as we know it has emerged only in the last fifty years and it will continue to evolve as communication technology changes and mass communication becomes even more sophisticated.
This perpetual change and development is the basic reason why advertising is such a stimulating business in which to work.
The other reason is that the demands of what you advertise and for whom also changes — you don't often find people in advertising complaining of boredom.
Marketing and advertising
During the last twenty years advertising has enjoyed many important changes such as the introduction of colour television commercial radio, and colour printing in newspapers.
Perhaps the most important is the new concept of marketing — a logical approach to selling which turns old practices upside down.
In the old days manufacturers produced the goods and salesmen  sold them with the help of advertising.
The ability to produce in greater quantities made this system wasteful and it has given way to a more scientific process.
Today your marketing man, often together with his agency, uses market research to establish what products — the consumer wants and at what price.
He then calculates estimated sales, co-ordinates with his production department so the product is made in the right volume, and enlists the help of advertising and other specialist services, such as sales promotion and public relations, to help him achieve the projected sales.
This marketing approach to products has been beneficial for the consumer because it determines what a company will sell based on what the consumer wants, or the market place is ready to discover and buy, rather than on hope and guesswork.
When you look around at all the -products which flop, or those which make you wonder who would buy them, and at the companies which fail to keep up with consumer desires and demands, you may well pause to reflect on the success of the marketing approach.
Like most things in life, it is neither a sure thing nor an exact "science" , but modern commerce has thrived on marketing theory and it is now part and parcel of everyday commercial judgements.
The implications of this approach for advertising personnel are considerable, and the best way to grasp what this means is to examine who works in advertising, and so begin to understand the  hierarchy or power structures.
People in advertising
Most people connected with the business have titles such as marketing manager, copywriter, or research assistant.
These identify and, to a large degree, define what work the person does.
The advertiser
Any person, organization, or government department who buys and pays for an advertisement is "the advertiser" .
In organizations and government departments who regularly advertise, someone will be appointed to be responsible for the advertising.
Many companies have their own advertising departments.
The marketing expert in the company is likely to be the key person as regards any advertising because his influence and, sometimes, his authority, extends over the sales department, research department, promotion, advertising and public relations.
For this reason, a marketing person has great opportunity for advancement.
Big manufacturing companies often have marketing departments where products are divided into brands, like Persil, or into product groups such as soap powders and detergents.
Those marketing staff in charge of a brand or product group are called "brand managers." 
Non-commercial clients, say charities, and large associations, may also have marketing staff for their "products" , which are in the form of services or benefits.
In any case, someone somewhere will turn up as your client and he, she or it is the advertiser as far as you are concerned.
The advertising agency
The concept of marketing means that your advertising agency account personnel should have marketing as well as advertising experience and that the research function should be represented within the agency.
An agency is undoubtedly the forum where you will gain the best all-round experience in your career, and have the biggest chance of rising to the top in the advertising business.
Agencies can be one-man bands, small outfits, large public companies which may work internationally, or multinational companies.
The media
Newspapers, magazines and television companies all have advertising departments selling space or time.
Their work is ancillary to that of producing a newspaper or running a television station and they are not essentially in advertising itself.
However, such jobs may prove useful stepping stones to a job within an advertising agency.
Marketing is part of the media too, and much money and time is spent researching and showing how the media's consumers — the readers and viewers — match up to the advertisers' desired audience of consumers for his product.
Specialist companies
Advertising calls upon the expertise of numerous specialist companies, for example public relations consultancies, design  consultants, research companies, direct marketing companies, television production companies, photographic and artwork studios, print, type and blockmaking companies.
Such specialists, of course, also undertake work direct for other clients.
The research company through one of its directors may make a feature film.
The work of specialist companies for advertising agencies is dealt with later.
Although they work for advertising agencies they are not strictly advertising people but specialists in their particular field, such as photographers, illustrators, printers or film technicians.
Once again, the marketing mentality permeates these specialist services for they need to understand marketing principles and concepts even if they do not directly involve themselves in the data and planning.
Marketing terms such as "segment" , and "audience" are all par for the course and everyday jargon if you work in advertising or in the specialist companies serving the industry.
No two agencies work in quite the same way.
Smaller but still competitive advertisers tend to prefer the creative "hot-shops" , whilst major spenders usually prefer well established slightly more "solid" agencies.
The following chapters explain in general the opportunities open to you in an average agency.
Where are advertising agencies?
No matter where you finally wind up in the advertising business, you will want to work at some stage in an agency to gain real insight into advertising and acquire first-rate skills (and, hopefully, reputation) that puts wheels under your career.
But which one? and where are they?
It is not always true that either the London agencies or the "big boys" of the business are the places where you'll learn a more professional approach.
However, the most important spenders are clients who most frequently use London-based agencies.
Valuable experience can be gained in small agencies anywhere because you may have to turn your hand to any job that needs doing at a given moment.
Multi-national companies tend to prefer big agencies who can handle overseas advertising from a network of international offices.
Strategy, the foundation of successful advertising
Ask a client what he wants his advertising to achieve and you  may be greeted by a bewildered silence.
This is particularly true of the company puff wanted because the chairman thinks he should run an advertisement which says no more than "we are jolly good fellows" .
Yet the question is vital to the agency which must know the company's resources, problems and objectives.
Before advertising can be carried out, the agency must understand the client's true needs in the short and long term.
Only then can a strategy be hammered out and the right advertising solution devised.
Good advertising communicates the right message to the right people at the right time in a way that will interest or amuse them, but above all make them want to buy the product, service, or even "idea" .
They must be in no doubt as to what they are buying.
The most glamorous imaginable TV commercial filmed in the Caribbean with an all-star cast is a failure if, when in the supermarket, the viewer can't remember what the product was called.
The right people are, of course, the people most likely to want to buy the product.
If this is of limited interest, say a knitting wool, you would find it wasteful to go on TV because so many viewers would not be knitters.
You would reach your market more economically in a women's magazine where the percentage of readers who knit is known to be high.
The way the message is presented also plays its part.
As a TV documentary once pointed out, a hand-lettered cardboard sign by the roadside saying, "Free range eggs" is an effective advertisement.
If the message were "flying lessons" it wouldn't be.
When your life is at stake an amateurish appearance is not reassuring.
Arriving at the right message, deciding who the right people are, and how to reach them, is a highly complex business, and the result is an advertising strategy for your client which is sound and provides a realistic and workable rationale for his campaign.
How advertising works
An advertising agency normally takes over a client's advertising for a fee, or for a percentage of the amount of money the client spends on television time or space in newspapers, magazines or poster sites.
A budget of money to be spent is agreed.
Sometimes research is undertaken at this stage to find out why and how the product is bought.
For example, when a householder is in the market for double-glazing does he resort  to Yellow Pages, take the advice of a neighbour, or depend on one of the well-known and heavily advertised names?
Account men make it their business to learn everything they can about the client's product and how it compares with others on the market, and a strategy is arrived at with the help of the researchers and planners, and sometimes with the creative team on the writing and art side.
Ideally, the strategy should reflect a plus point for the product, something its competition hasn't got.
It is generally possible to isolate at least one compelling selling feature even if it is only that your client's product is the cheapest.
Once a strategy is agreed it is up to the copy writer and art director to turn it into an advertising idea or ideas.
Sometimes a number of ideas are researched to find out which most appeals to potential buyers.
The media department then works out how the client's money should be spent.
Is it best to go for television, radio, newspapers, magazines, posters, point-of-sale material like shop cards on counters or in shop windows, or brochures and leaflets?
As people cannot buy what isn't on sale it is often important to tell "the trade" , like retailers, first about a new product or an impending advertising campaign.
Announcing a campaign often boosts sales to the trade, because forthcoming television advertising may persuade grocers, for example, to stock up so that they can meet the extra demand.
Hence advertising in trade publications is often part of the media mix.
The creative team then set about bringing their idea to life in all the chosen media and putting them together in a fashion which the client will understand.
If you can't make the client understand what you are talking about, it is likely that consumers will also be mystified, so the client won't let you run the campaign.
To show the client what you are proposing, commercials are sometimes read and described; sometimes a narrative tape is recorded which is a spoken description of the action, perhaps backed by music; or sometimes a "story board" is drawn up with a number of key frames illustrating what viewers will see on the TV screen.
For radio commercials a "dummy tape" is very often made with the words and music or "jingle" simply recorded.
Advertisements for newspapers and magazines are shown in layout form with a board showing the overall design and a rough illustration with the headline and subheadings lettered in.
Accompanying this is a typescript of the text.
If posters, packaging, show cards, or other visual matter  are part of the campaign, then they will be shown in rough form, although "rough" actually means very realistic and finished looking material.
This work is then "presented" to the client, probably by the creative team, with the agency top brass in attendance, who outline the campaign strategy with the media and research departments explaining their conclusions.
Such presentations can be nerve-wracking occasions.
Will the client like what you are about to show?
A classic story is told about the unveiling of a vast poster showing a dish piled high with baked beans.
After staring at it for a minute the client pointed at the picture and exclaimed angrily, "I don't like that bean." 
Mercifully, client's comments are generally more rational.
But be warned — they do not have to be.
It would be nice to think that this presentation is the end of it and that the client says "Go ahead" , and the agency produces the campaign.
This may happen, but usually the presentation is only the beginning of the client and agency shaping the work into a final version.
Clients like to think they are creative and often aspire to be part of the agency team creating and producing the campaign.
So there are usually many meetings between all parties until the final approval to go ahead is given.
Finally, when any disagreements have been ironed out and all has been agreed, the creative team can start turning the ideas and designs into the real thing with the help of other colleagues, outside technicians and various specialists.
Television and radio commercials are normally made by outside production companies and sound studios under the supervision of the agency creative team and agency TV department.
The skill lies in choosing the right production company and working harmoniously with them.
Illustrators or photographers are chosen for press or magazine advertisements or posters.
The quality of illustrations and especially photographs in advertisements can be of the highest today and such work can cost thousands of pounds for just one picture.
So keen is competition in this field that most photographers specialize in a single subject, for example, fashion, cars or food.
Type faces are carefully selected for any visual text.
Typography is a skilled art and there are specialists who deal with nothing else.
The agency department responsible for the finished product, called "a mechanical" , is the production department.
It is from  the mechanical that a block is made for printing.
The photograph or illustration is mounted down in place, and headline, subhead and copy (the text) are printed and placed in position.
This is then the accurate finished artwork for the advertisement that will appear in the newspaper or magazine.
The traffic or progress department monitors the advertisement's progress from the creative group to the newspaper or magazine concerned.
They are ultimately responsible for its appearance in the right publication on the right day.
Progress work may not be the most exciting job in advertising but it is a highly responsible and essential one.
The research department is often involved again at this stage when the advertising starts to appear in order to judge its effectiveness.
At this point modifications and future developments in the client's campaign can be worked out.
2 Working in advertising
As you have seen, advertising calls for a number of special skills.
There are, however, some generalizations and characteristics which you should understand before choosing a career in advertising.
It is important to remember that whatever you are producing it is the client who pays.
His views must be paramount, if not always agreed with.
Suppose your client insists on advertising his product on television when you believe his story could be more economically and effectively told in the press.
For example, a photocopier which would only be bought by office managers and which would need fairly detailed copy to do it justice would be a waste of money to advertise on TV because the number of office managers in your audience is so tiny, and TV is not the right place to put a lot of product detail because time is so limited.
It is up to the agency to persuade him to change his mind.
Should he remain adamant, it may be necessary to point out that you will do what he wishes but that it is against the judgement of the agency.
Even then, trouble will eventually boil up.
Good relationships and the ability to get on with people, including your own colleagues as well as your clients, are of great importance.
After all, advertising is a "people" business and you are a member of a team.
Frequent meetings and possible disagreements can cause considerable stress.
If advertising were an exact science, things would be easier, but again, because it is a "people" business, there are plenty of jokes to lighten feelings of stress.
The elaborate leaving cards prepared for colleagues going on to new jobs or retiring are a remarkable testimony to the good humour of advertising people who see the comedy in the serious daily "grind" of their work.
If lazy, do not apply
Advertising is not a nine-to-five job.
Clockwatching has no place and everyone is expected to work as long as is necessary to do the job — and to do so without complaint.
Union membership is virtually unknown except for isolated technicians like film projection people.
Agencies are run on the assumption that everyone will be prepared to work overtime, willingly.
It is  the price you are expected to pay for a varied and entertaining job with an above average wage.
There is a "down side" to this aspect of a career in advertising for the long hours can and do interfere with attempts to strike a balance between work and play, career and home.
There are prices to pay for success in many fields, but in advertising the demand on your waking hours is great.
The idea that people in agencies start late in the morning, dash off a campaign idea, have a long, expensive lunch, then go home early is a myth.
While high pay is not a myth, it is not as high as is generally supposed — but if you turn into a super advertising star, the sky's the limit.
On the other hand, well paid or not you will not enjoy great security.
The profit margin in advertising is surprisingly low, currently about 1–2%.
Staff costs are high.
If an agency loses a valuable client spending millions, it may well be necessary to dismiss staff.
The ups and downs of pay, position, and reputation are all part of the game in an advertising career.
The story is told of two top executives from different agencies who would wave to each other, one from his chauffeur driven Jaguar and the other from his Porsche, as they passed on the M4 when buzzing up and down to important clients.
One day, they met in the second class compartment of a train — unemployed but taking the bad days as cheerfully as the good, knowing that tomorrow probably would find them enjoying the material rewards of advertising yet again.
In advertising, no one is ever "safe" .
Many advertising people increase their salaries by changing agencies.
This is common practice, but it is a mistake to overdo it.
A prospective employer can view too many changes with suspicion, often rightly.
When you start working in advertising get a few years of solid experience with one agency under your belt.
Women in advertising
In a modern advertising agency women are welcomed in every department.
Advertising is not alone in offering a fair and square deal to women, for public relations and other service industries in the communication field all offer unrivalled opportunities for women to complete on real and equal terms with men.
Indeed, as the majority of consumer "buyers" are women, a woman's point of view is most valuable and a woman's capacity for detail, at least in my opinion and that of many  employers, is an eminently valuable asset in work where detail and exactness are essential.
In my experience, women often have greater stamina and are able to handle comfortably the long, often arduous hours of agency work better than many of their male colleagues.
Don't think for a moment that the women are all on the creative side of the business.
Some are managing directors of large international operations and others the best "account men" in advertising.
Good looks and youth never hurt your chances of success whether you are male or female.
As to age, one of the most successful writers in British advertising was still claiming awards and enjoying the loyalties of major clients when she was over sixty.
Account direction
An advertiser's business with its agency is known as an "account" , and account people are the men and women who run it on a day-to-day basis.
How many such personnel there are in an agency and exactly what they are called depends on the agency, but there will probably be, reading from the top position down, an account director, perhaps an account manager, an account executive, and an assistant account executive.
These are the front men and women who deal with the client at appropriate levels of seniority, interpreting the client's wishes to the agency and the agency's solutions to the client.
At worst an account person could degenerate into a mere messenger.
At best, he or she is crucial to the successful running of several accounts and, therefore, the agency.
What sort of people are successful in account services?
They represent the agency and so should be personable, likeable and a good mixer, successful with the client on and off the set.
They should be trusted and respected for their grip of the job and their good judgement.
At the same time they should know how to order the right meal and whether, when work is done, they should take their client to the opera or a night club or let him go home.
They should be able to immerse themselves in their client's business, whether it is making machine tools or convenience foods or selling unit trusts.
They may well have to take detailed briefings and relay them to the creative department, so memory and an articulate mind are essential.
Account executives must have a head for figures and a feeling for spending the client's money wisely because they may need to  explain costs at any moment.
Understanding the advertising business inside out is vital, for it is they who must be aware of all the numerous restraints imposed, not only by the advertising industry itself through the Advertising Standards Authority and The Independent Television Companies Association (ITCA), but also by the manufacturers of products in sensitive areas.
For example, those of the proprietary medicines industry, represented by the Pharmaceutical Association of Great Britain (PAGB).
Here there is a maze of rules about what you can and cannot do and say but these are infinitely preferable to the alternative — control through official regulations and legislation.
They should be familiar with the work of all their colleagues in media, research and production.
Insufficient knowledge of the latter can waste a lot of money.
Executives need to know how to lay on services that are outside normal agency routine: how to set up a direct marketing operation; organize an effective exhibition; or lay on a cabaret at a salesmen's conference.
Being a good and persuasive talker is a must for this work as you may have to get up and speak at a sales conference or at an agency presentation.
The telephone may ring at any moment and an account executive will be expected to know when a client can see the "Answerprint" of their new commercial or proofs of the latest press advertisement, so complete knowledge of the minutiae of the client's business ready at his finger tips is required.
Above all, account people must be able to get on with everyone — colleagues as much as clients.
There is no way to do this but to earn their respect and to remember that they, too, can be hard-pushed.
You never know when you may be asking colleagues to perform "miracles" and they won't take kindly to being ordered about.
There is next to no hierarchy in advertising, so you may be in charge of the account in the managing director's eyes, but an experienced creative person won't consider that you are "senior" to him.
This phenomenon actually adds greatly to the congenial atmosphere of an agency and encourages friendship and good relations at all levels.
There are no hard and fast rules for becoming an account person.
Previous experience in advertising or marketing is obviously an advantage but it is possible to become a junior account executive without it — although you would have to expect to be something of a dogsbody at first.
Competition is keen as the way curricula vitae are now  produced show.
These are often big production numbers printed in full colour, but even this may not single you out from the crowd.
A managing director once described being bombarded by a certain young man determined at least to be seen.
Eventually a big parcel arrived, filled with shavings and tissue paper and containing one very superior chocolate.
He got his interview.
At the last ditch, personality is everything.
If you can't sell yourself you are unlikely to be able to sell the agency's work.
What are the advantages of an account person's job?
A lively and varied existence with panics, certainly, but good times as well.
An almost unrivalled insight into British and American business which could alter the course of your career.
An account executive working on the business of a merchant bank might become so interested in financial matters that he moves over to his client's advertising department, but as a general rule, the chances of rising to the top are greater in an agency.
Thanks to their all-round experience and in particular to planning the marketing skills, the board of an advertising agency is generally largely drawn from the account side, although a medium-to-large agency would almost certainly also have creative, media, research and financial representatives.
What are the disadvantages?
Perhaps the feeling that you must of necessity always be at the client's beck and call, and some clients have been known to take advantage of this situation.
Your own bosses also sometimes keep in uncomfortably close touch with you — telephone calls at night, sudden desires to "sit in" on your client meetings, unscheduled weekend meetings.
This is only to be expected, for the management of a client's account is the management of an advertising agency in miniature.
Research
In advertising the purpose of research is to be able to plan the campaign so you know to whom you are talking, what you should be saying, which idea will best convey your message and, finally, whether that message is having the right results.
This kind of researched planning is so vital to the success of an advertising campaign that many agencies now have planners concentrating entirely on this aspect of the work.
Many of these planners have research backgrounds, others are drawn from the account side.
What does research in advertising involve?
Few agencies now have the time or the staff to train new entrants in specialist skills, and research is such a skill.
If you are interested in research, you should join an independent research company and gain some experience before moving to an agency.
The majority of well-known research companies are based in London.
They can generally undertake big surveys involving large numbers of people and they provide statistics and interpretations of them.
They also set up and run small group discussions, which is done by independent free-lance researchers as well.
Once in an agency, researchers must realize that the end product of their job is not research in itself, but advertising, and they must be genuinely interested in that.
The researcher is there to help the agency formulate the right strategy and the right advertising solution.
It is a continuous process.
In the initial stages, the researcher needs to understand the market, and the client's position and objectives within it.
That is, what does the client want the advertising to achieve and to whom should the advertising be addressed?
From these basics a strategy is defined, refined and agreed with the client.
The researcher can then produce a brief for the creative team which should include what the status of the product is seen to be, who their consumers are, what the advertising is supposed to be doing and a whole host of other basic data.
Perhaps research shows that the advertising should give new information, stimulate trial, change, ideas and perception or simply build awareness or greater familiarity with a name.
The key benefit of the campaign should be highlighted, and guidance given on style and tone of voice.
Finally the creative team should be told where the advertising should appear and how much money there is to spend.
It should be remembered that research findings and conclusions are guidelines, not holy writ.
Creative people can be hostile to research, and your findings should be tactfully presented and not issued as orders.
Furthermore, research findings can sometimes seem like a glimpse of the obvious, no more than what an intelligent person would have arrived at anyway.
It is then that the effect of research on the client should be considered.
It can be very useful indeed to have research results which back up your own convictions.
When the creative team has produced an idea or ideas, these  are often put to suitable groups to get their reactions.
The groups consist of carefully selected members of the same potential market segment or audience to be reached with the advertising, so they are likely to get on together.
One group might consist of the younger consumer end of the market and one might be business women of thirty-plus.
Let us suppose your agency is competing for the account of a new skin care range.
It is based on natural ingredients like elderflower, lily and lemon balm.
They have attractive names and are very prettily packed with labels like old fashioned botanical drawings, thus making the range distinctive on the shop shelf.
The pleasant natural scents make them agreeable to use and they are very reasonable in price.
The idea of natural ingredients is, of course, not a new one and the client is, in effect, jumping on a profitable bandwagon already in the market place.
Yet, after the first year or two he is disappointed that sales of his products are not better.
Now, your agency creative team has worked on a number of concepts and put up campaigns for all of them: the beneficial effect on the skin of natural ingredients; the sheer charm of the packs on the dressing table; the ease and delight of using such products.
The client was not impressed.
Then, the writer indulged in some lateral thinking.
Remembering how often she had bought skin care products and abandoned them she thought of the collection of half used jars and tubes in her dressing table drawer and came up this headline: "Our creams and lotions are all used up" with the striking visual of a tube squeezed to the last drop.
The art director included a small shot of the range in the advertisement so that its charm would not go unseen.
What happened rather surprised the research department when the concept was tested with a potential user group.
It was immediately understood by them that to use a product to the very end is the best proof of its excellence.
So the challenging headline "our creams and lotions are all used up" made them read the rest of the copy.
The client ended up with advertising quite unlike that of any skin care manufacturer.
His sales boomed.
He loved his advertising agency and increased his budget.
Happy days all round.
Normally such campaign research reactions are not so conclusive.
Results are evaluated by the researcher and conveyed to the creative team.
Here, tact is particularly important.
It will not be appreciated if you just say: "These all bombed out" .
You need to explain why one idea was better  liked than another or whether an idea was appreciated, but perhaps not ideally expressed.
In this manner, you will be making a real and positive contribution to the development of the advertising.
To set up group discussions, the researcher needs to select the research company or independent freelancer most suited to the job.
Some of the latter may excel at specialised subjects such as engineering or finance.
Their task is to draw their group out, and to make people talk in the way that will prove most useful.
Their techniques can vary a lot, drawn widely from psychological techniques and group dynamics.
The researcher must brief the company or freelancer very thoroughly and explain all the kind of things they want to find out.
The researcher may or may not attend the group discussion, but he or she will have to evaluate the results and put them into report form, adding his or her conclusions.
Your job is by no means over when the advertising begins to appear.
Research may well be undertaken to discover how effective it is proving.
Are the campaign objectives being achieved and, if not, why not?
Is the message coming over and is it the right message?
At this stage fine tuning of the campaign can take place and future developments can be planned.
A day in the life of a researcher can contain any of the tasks outlined here or several of them.
Perhaps the researcher is making initial studies on behalf of a new client, consulting data from companies which conduct market studies which are available to anyone who subscribes, like Nielsen, Attwood, and Mintel.
They cover topics including goods selling in and out (which stores are buying what from the manufacturer in what quantity, and how quickly consumers are then buying that product) or what type of product consumers are buying, and they give comparisons between brands in particular categories, for example soft drinks, analgesics, breakfast cereals, and almost anything in fact.
Valuable information such as company sales statistics or previous sales campaign studies can come from the client himself.
It is often surprising what information companies do have, but how little they actually use it, so a good researcher will try hard to find what is available.
Later the researcher may attend a group discussion on behalf of another client, brief the creative department about how best to present some of their alternative campaign ideas for yet another, or attend a client meeting to present research recommendations or findings.
Again, tact and the ability to get on with people are vital at all stages, particularly if the client has its own research department as some of the very big companies do.
You will need to cooperate with them without losing the initiative.
Although research may appear as logical analysis and mere statistics to you, clients sometimes endow it with a kind of magic.
Anyone who has used the technique of showing to a client edited video tape of research in progress on a group of consumers at a presentation, will notice the rapt expression on his face as he looks at real people talking about his product.
You may think as I often do: has the client never before seen his consumers?
Perhaps these techniques have that irresistible fascination of overhearing gossip about oneself.
It is at once an amusing and instructive exercise in the power of communicating.
Planning: a new career horizon
The nature and services of advertising are always evolving, and today's approach to marketing has caused the role of the planner in agencies to become more and more important.
Research is an integral part of the planner's job, so senior research people sometimes assume the role of planners.
But a separate breed of planners is now emerging, brain children of a handful of agencies or, more accurately, individuals, who pioneered this concept.
Two London agencies in particular spearheaded this movement.
They both have large planning departments and are prepared to take young people with no previous experience and train them.
To have received your training at one of these agencies is a passport to success and now many other agencies are creating planning departments.
Until there are more planners than required, training and job opportunities will be good.
There is a clear difference in roles between the planner and account executive.
The planner represents the consumer's voice while the account executive represents that of the client.
There are instances when their spheres of influence overlap, but the planner is principally concerned with the consumer's point of view.
Why does she buy a certain product, where and how often?
Is she satisfied with it?
Could she be persuaded to buy more and, if so, for what reasons?
To obtain answers, the planner uses research of all kinds, including group discussions and wider surveys.
The planners also track the success of a  campaign by studying continuous data flowing in about it.
With all this statistical data, it follows that planners must be numerate, able to read statistics, and comprehend the analysis of them.
They should be able to present research findings in terms that are relevant and understandable to the client.
There are certain personality characteristics that are basic to people who make good planners.
They need to be greatly interested in people and what makes them tick.
They should have an abundance of curiosity and a natural desire to find out about new things.
Above all, planners need a sensitivity to emerging social trends, consumer attitudes, and life-styles.
Although they are dealing with facts, planners are more creative in their approach than the account executive.
It is often a good thing to be somewhat anarchic, never rigid in your opinions, and always open to new ideas if you want to be a planner.
Once again that requirement to get on with people, clients, account executives and the creative teams is basic to your daily work.
Just how does cooperation between a planner and the creative team work?
After all, creative people are supposed to be sensitive and aware of the consumer and society and in real touch with change and mood.
Let's take an example of the planner and creative team together.
Trying to devise the strategy for a lager campaign, the planner found out through the research that the key benefit consumers looked for in lager was refreshment — incidentally something no other beer advertiser mentioned.
The creative team took this new insight and used it as a spring-board to create a very successful campaign based on sprouting leaves and the headline: "Refreshes the parts other beers cannot reach" , thus demonstrating the imaginative leap creative people make from research findings to effect communication messages.
Although at the moment only a handful of agencies have planning departments, planning is a fast-growing area in advertising and not only advertising-management consultants are beginning to recognise the importance of the planner in many aspects of commerce.
Here is a career in advertising where the potential for moving out to other service industries will probably exist.
Planning is an attractive job, interesting and profitable, but it is a developing area of expertise.
This means there are as yet few signposts pointing to success — no hard and fast rules as to how to qualify, how to get started, or really exact definitions of the work you do.
Should you succeed in becoming a planner  you would be helping to create these parameters.
Media
Advertising is a cut-throat business and nowhere is this more evident than in the media department of a thriving agency.
The business of the media department is to ensure, within the financial restraints imposed, that the client's advertising is seen by as many of the right people as possible at the right time.
Few clients can afford to advertise throughout the year and media people have to judge whether a "drip" will work better than a "burst" .
That is, whether spaced out advertising — the "drip" — over a long period would work better than heavy advertising, the "burst" , concentrated into a short space of time.
The medium through which you send your message must be appropriate, whether that medium is television, radio, newspaper, or posters.
If you want to talk to gardeners it's cheaper to address them on the gardening page of a newspaper or in a specialist gardening magazine than on television.
You'll probably catch them in a more receptive mood, too.
When detail about the product is necessary then printed advertisements are often better because there is time for the consumer to grasp the totality of the message you are sending.
With some products, particularly new ones, advertising to the trade can be as important as advertising to the consumer.
The manager of a garden centre can't stock a new fertiliser if he doesn't know it exists.
He also needs to know if your consumer advertising will push customers into his garden centre to buy the new product.
So when a campaign is planned a detailed schedule, with perhaps one or two alternatives, is drawn up on which every insertion in every publication and every spot on TV or radio 15 shown with its size, length and date.
Once the schedule is agreed, the media sets about booking the spaces and times at the most advantageous prices they can get.
For although British Rate and Data (BRAD for short) gives information on rates, these are always open to negotiation, and discounts can be arranged for a number of reasons.
It is in this market-place of buying and selling that the media man shows his real skill and flair.
He is dealing with someone on the selling side with similar guts and talent and these space sellers for publications or TV contractors are experienced negotiators too.
The agency man owes his knowledge of a particular publication, say newspaper profiles", not only to the National Readership  Survey, but to the sales literature from the media itself which have plied him with relevant data about readership and special opportunities and offers to make their publication the best of all possible buys.
Time buying on television works in much the same way, although bigger money is involved.
Getting on for 50% of the money spent on advertising goes into television, and more like 70% in big agencies.
There are 15 contractors appointed by the Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA) each responsible for selling their own air time as prime time or other time.
All, except Channel 4, have their own studios and derive their revenues from selling time and selling programmes.
There are currently nearly 50 commercial radio stations where time can be bought, and radio appears to be steadily gaining in popularity and has certainly become increasingly creative, entertaining and often very relevant to the area it serves.
Cinema advertising is booked through two main contractors, Pearl and Dean and Rank Screen Advertising.
It is an admirable medium for hitting a young audience right on target.
It is much favoured by drink advertisers and, of course, cigarette advertisers who are not allowed on television.
Poster advertising is handled by outdoor contractors who run their own grading systems.
It will be seen that the conscientious media man has to keep on good terms with a lot of people.
Although bargaining is often very tough you've always got a better chance if you know with whom you are dealing — it helps if you've had the odd meal or drink together or a game of squash.
For example, TV stations about to close their books for the weekend often have some blank shots to dispose of at a bargain price.
The contractor is obviously more likely to offer them to someone he knows and likes rather than to a stranger.
Media is one of the best documented jobs around, but as well as being able to assimilate all these facts and figures, media people need to be good mixers, good talkers and skilled negotiators.
They often go into the attack basing their arguments on, say, sales data, and if that fails, they fall back on another tack, perhaps new product development.
Sometimes they have to go above the heads of their normal contacts.
Nerves of steel help if you want to be successful in media buying.
There are a number of clerical jobs to be done in a media department as well; a newcomer will have to do them, and they  can be a useful way to learn the job.
Who will this newcomer be?
A graduate perhaps, a very bright secretary promoted from another department, or someone from one of the media contractors who wants the broader experience of agency work.
Chances of advancement are good although you may have to move agencies to get it.
Most agencies believe in media representation at board level and these directors can be powerful as they can easily show the direct connection between their hard media buying and the agency's splendid profits.
Writing
There was a time in advertising when the writer was generally considered to be the senior partner of the creative team of writer and art director.
Writers were thought to be probably the more rational and intellectual of the two.
The writer often called the tune and imposed his ideas on the art director and visualiser, as a junior art director was then called.
For some years now, writer and art director have been considered as equal partners working closely together.
Television may have encouraged this process but there are other good reasons for it.
Both partners are in the ideas business, and if the ideas are good ones, it doesn't matter where they come from.
Most frequently they come from day-long dialogues between the two.
It doesn't even matter if the art director thinks of the headline and the writer contributes its visual expression.
The important thing is being able to recognise a good idea.
Once this is done the two can revert to their traditional roles, the writer supplying the copy and the art director suggesting how the visual can help it sell.
Selling is the operative word.
The fact that you have edited the school magazine doesn't necessarily fit you to be an advertising writer, even though a feeling of familiarity with words is a good thing.
Interest in selling is more important than fine writing.
It is sometimes salutary to imagine yourself selling your clients product from door to door when clarity and persuasion would help you far more than oratory.
Make no mistake about what I mean by selling: it doesn't matter if you are trying to get people to buy tins of beans, contribute money to starving millions, or vote for a certain politician, you are selling the product, social cause, or person.
The ability to write clearly and well is a tool of the trade and  a very necessary one, but it is the idea which you have that will make your advertising stand out from the rest.
How do you arrive at a good idea?
If there was a clear-cut answer, advertising would be a much easier business than it is.
Talent for ideas is hard to define.
Some people are never going to have it.
The creative team, for example, who appealed for help for the starving Biafrans with the headline, "Fresh food is flying to Biafra" with a visual showing a few live locusts knew what they were doing.
It all looks so simple when you see the advertisement but could you have thought of it?
However, when confronted with a new product or a new problem, there are a number of things to be done which could help you find the right answer:
1
Study the research which has been undertaken.
Make sure you know exactly the audience for your advertisement and, if possible, what they are looking for when they buy a product like that of your clients.
2
Study the competition, the commercials and the advertisements of other manufacturers who make the same thing.
3
Get to know all the facts.
You may have to tour the client's factory and see how the product is made.
Writers often strike gold this way.
A leading advertisement writer describes how she was going round a factory making china when she saw an employee taking plates from the production line, smashing them and throwing the pieces into a box.
The writer asked what this was all about.
She learnt that these plates did not come up to the manufacturer's high standards and would go back into the melting pot.
Further questioning revealed that the standards of the manufacturer in question were demonstrably higher than those of his rivals.
Also, that in spite of the immense price difference between various designs, the basic china was of exactly the same high standard.
The first advertisement to appear told this story under the headline, "Before you choose the pattern, choose the china." 
4
Find out whether the product or service has any features its rivals haven't got.
In advertising parlance, this difference is termed a unique selling proposition, or usp.
It's appeal depends on its nature.
 "The jelly made with real fruit" , would be an attractive  proposition.
"The only toothpaste with XKL, is less attractive because you'd have to read the copy to learn what the mystery ingredient, XKL, did for you.
However, there's no doubt that a usp puts the creative team in a stronger position than not having one, as long as he or she succeeds in selling it to the public.
Of course, there are many occasions when the product is similar or identical with the competition.
The task here is to make people feel that it is some way superior, "Nothing works faster than Anadin" , is probably one of the best examples.
Wherever you advertise, on television, radio and posters, or in the press and magazines you are competing desperately for people's attention.
How you say something is as important as what you say about it.
Take the case of the copywriter charged with advertising men's shirts with three different sleeve lengths.
Instead of saying "shirts made in 3 different sleeve lengths" which might not have been noticed by readers, the advertisement carried the headline: "Is your husband in another man's arms?" — a proposition hard to ignore.
Copywriting is a lively and varied job.
You may be called upon to devise anything from a competition to a collection of recipes (taking expert advice if you are wise).
You may find yourself writing detailed advertisements for an insurance company specific enough to find favour with their actuaries, or inventing a reason for people to buy a particular chocolate bar.
You may have to give accurate instructions about how to assemble do-it-yourself furniture.
A major agency used to include in its copy test for would-be copy writers the extraordinarily difficult task of writing how to put up a deck chair, with no diagrams to help!
Try doing it.
Naming a product is a recurrent event and is taken very seriously indeed.
One major agency was once engaged in naming a new brand of margarine.
Every copywriter was asked to put in a list.
A well known joker thought he would liven things up a bit.
Unfortunately, his list somehow slipped through the cordon and appeared among those submitted to the client.
Top of his list was the word "Butter" .
The agency account man must have had a sticky time explaining that one to the client.
What sort of person should you be if you think advertising writing is the job for you?
You should certainly be prepared to learn, to master the intricacies of an unknown subject, whether it is unit trusts, central heating, a children's charity or a health education issue.
Acquiring this kind of expertise brings its own  rewards and it is gratifying to discover that it is often easier to explain a subject to others when you have had some difficulty mastering it yourself.
You should understand and sympathise with other people.
Talking down to them doesn't work.
Generally, their reasons for buying things aren't very different from yours.
Be aware of current public opinion — the writer who advertised a vacuum cleaner with the words: "At last a turbo for women drivers" was running a grave risk of alienating women.
You should be interested in literature and there are excellent reasons for this.
For example, the ability to parody a style can be a useful skill.
You should also be interested in the theatre, cinema, television, and music and include them regularly in your life.
Remember you will play your part in casting a commercial or commissioning background music.
Besides, a good sense of rhythm will improve your writing.
One of the most important aspects of a writer's creative personality is the degree to which he or she is sensitive and responsive to changes in public tastes, and is able to sense when such changes are in the ascendancy, acceptable to the vast majority of people, and can be successfully used within an advertising context.
Such sensitivity is a valuable gift.
There are fashions in advertising as in most other things.
This affects the visual side as well as the writing of campaigns.
Yesteryear it was "Guinness is good for you" .
Today it is "Are you Guinnless?" .
A strange flying bird was once the mascot on every poster, now the manufacturer shows young tee shirted males in the prime of their vitality.
Society changes, fashions in advertising change, it is a constantly altering environment from which and in which you will write.
Writers need to have good judgement.
This can sometimes mean throwing away your own idea when your art director has come up with a better one — very hard on your ego but a necessary victory for good judgement.
As you will often have to sell your own work, it helps to be a good and persuasive talker who gets on well with people inside and outside the agency.
Will you ever be asked to do something you don't believe in like advertising cigarettes, animal fur fashions, the political party you don't like, or processed foods you can't abide?
Almost certainly not.
Your principles and hard held prejudices will be respected if for no other reason than one of simple commercial sense: you probably wouldn't do a good job creating the  advertisement even if you tried, because you actively disbelieve in the product or proposition.
All, of course, also depends greatly on your agency.
Some are more "tolerant" than others.
The big London agencies with their billing largely on television find it saves time and money to farm out some writing work to specialised companies or freelancers.
This could apply to trade advertising, or business-to-business advertising as it is called now, particularly if this is highly technical.
Below-the-line advertising, the term generally used for merchandising in stores including in-store promotions, is another case in point.
In a small agency the writer would probably have to devise these himself.
In another, there might be a separate below-the-line department.
A big agency might put the work out to an independent merchandising company.
Heavy writing jobs such as brochures are often given to freelancers who specialise in subjects like financial or technical writing.
In a small agency, however, you'd probably be expected to cope.
Advertising writing is an absorbing and interesting job with lots of laughs and lots of rewards, not least financially, if you prove to be good at it.
What are the disadvantages?
Most notably the sheer agony of sitting over a blank sheet of paper when ideas just don't come.
A top copy writer says: "When I look at people's work now I'm searching for signs of an original mind…of imagination." 
What's the worst that can happen?
Seeing a great campaign strangled to death.
It can happen.
Although clients like to boast of buying the best advertising advice, they don't always have the sense or the courage to take it.
Although in much television advertising there isn't much to say, it is still important to be able to write.
The people who gravitate to it are the so-called "funsters" — people attracted to the entertainment business.
At best, they have an instinctive feeling for what will please people and make them like the product.
It is a great gift.
Few people have it, but as there are comparatively few copywriter positions in London, you can't just waltz in and expect to make a mark.
In the final analysis, the nicest thing about writing for advertising is that you are judged by what you can do.
Art direction
Once the basic idea for the advertisement has been agreed, it falls to the art director, in consultation with the writer, to bring  it to life visually in commercials, advertisements, and printed material such as brochures and leaflets, and point of sale — material, which are show cards and other items for display actually in the stores.
You may also be asked to design packaging.
Training at commercial art school will have prepared you for much of the work you will be doing in advertising.
However, what is not generally known by the public is that although you will be designing all these items, the finished work will he commissioned from outside studios in the case of advertisements and print work, while TV commercials will be made by independent production companies.
Choosing these suppliers requires skill, knowledge and experience.
In television and radio you will have the help of your writer and TV producer.
For advertisements and print the choice will be entirely yours, although some agencies have art buyers who can help, particularly when it comes to negotiating costs.
With an advertisement you will often have to decide whether it is best illustrated by a drawing or a photograph.
You may then have to look through reams of examples before you decide on the right person for the job.
Just think of the variety of work you may have to commission: computer graphics or cartoon treatment for a commercial; a glossy colour illustration or a strip cartoon; action, fashion or food photography; straight-forward shots of the client's packs.
Commercial studios, photographers and, indeed, production companies are often highly specialised and the process of choosing the right one can be time consuming.
You become an expert on the experts.
You will be expected to keep this knowledge up to date, to make the time to look at studio representatives' portfolios of illustrators, story board artists or photographers.
Also, to look at the show reel of a new director or production company when invited to do so by your TV producer.
You should be able to assess this work and remember names as you never know when you might need them.
The art director, sometimes backed up by his writer, is then responsible for "briefing" the film director, artist or photographer, that means telling them exactly what is needed.
Naturally, you supervise the work closely, attend shoots and photographic sessions, and make sure everything is right.
In the case of photography, you may spend hours poring over a light box choosing the ideal photograph from a sheaf of contact negatives.
Remember that the creative team will be held responsible if the finished film or advertisement fails to live  up to its initial promise.
Because the finished product is produced in this way, it is not necessarily vital for the art director to draw well, but it certainly helps.
Particularly helpful is the ability to produce slick roughs, illustrating an idea or a copy line.
One of England's best creative teams depends largely on what they call "the overnight test" .
As they work, roughs are pinned to the wall where they remain until the following day.
A good night's sleep leads to a reappraisal.
The roughs are weeded out until only the best remain.
The art director, as well as being an ideas man and a designer, must also be a sound technician because an advertisement has got to work, which means it must fill the allotted space attractively and effectively.
A wide knowledge of printing and typography is needed, since good typography adds immeasurably to an advertisement's impact, readability and style, and it is the art director who will choose the type face.
Once the advertisement is approved it falls to the production department to transform the art director's layout into a "mechanical" , but the art director remains very much in control, perhaps choosing the house style and certainly monitoring all stages of production and correcting colour reproduction if necessary.
Of course there are humdrum jobs to be done like pasting things on boards and looking for scrap art from magazines to use in rough layouts.
A new entrant into a creative department can expect to be doing such jobs.
How long and how quickly it takes to graduate to the more interesting business of designing good advertising depends on talent and initiative.
If you are really good there is nowhere to go but up to where there is money to be made and awards to be won.
Listen to a top art director talking about his job: "I think I am probably better now than I was fifteen years ago but one has to work at it, pushing oneself further and further — subjecting oneself to vicious self-criticism.
The need is to reassure yourself and others that you've still got it.
It's a matter of pride, not vanity.
The only way to be good at this job is to put everything you've got into it.
When I get home after work I'm drained.
I used to paint a lot.
Now I haven't the energy.
But I'm still more influenced by artist's work than by award winning ads.
Those just lead one to copy…to regurgitate, and that's death.
Great pictures stretch one's mind…make one think.
Perhaps you saw the Shell poster with the headline: "Nothing is more dangerous  than a wet Zebra." 
I owe that visual to the Stubbs Exhibition at the Tate.
Mind you, I had to muscle the zebra up a bit and add the stripes, but the ominous power, the feeling of danger was pure Stubbs.
One of the best things about advertising is the people, creative people that is.
It's a fantastic club to belong to."
Another leading art director tells much the same story.
It fell to him to change the look of advertising for a well-known brand of cigarettes.
The aspirational look of the existing advertising had begun to be copied — the pack reverently placed on velvet and satin together with an orchid and a string of pearls.
He describes feeling like a rat in a trap, with almost everything forbidden.
No young people, nobody enjoying themselves, only a handful of meaningless words to be allowed.
He took a number of bold steps.
His inspiration was a Magritte-type surrealism in which the gold pack appeared in unlikely situations — inside a bird cage, as one of the pyramids or part of Stonehenge.
No words at all were used.
These advertisements were for posters at that time and used.mainly to back up TV commercials.
The cigarette became the brand leader.
Asked what is the most important lesson for an art director to learn?
He answers: "To be able to accept rejection" .
Television: the all-powerful coloured eye
The television department in an advertising agency is responsible for the process of turning the creative team's ideas, scripts and storyboards into finished TV or radio commercials and ensuring these appear on the right channel at the right time on the right day.
While the process may sound simple, it is anything but that.
A television producer in an agency must combine technical skill and judgement with meticulous administration, financial acumen and considerable tact, particularly when working with the agency creative team.
Whereas the idea is theirs and the producer is working in an advisory capacity, he or she almost certainly has greater technical knowledge and experience than the creative team and may well have to point out sequences which won't work and suggest modifications or changes.
The producer may have to insist that Production Company A is more suitable to make the film than Production Company B. Perhaps because of the show-business nature of producing for TV, creative teams can want to take charge which can prove a disaster.
Directors, the people in charge of actually shooting the  film, prefer to receive instructions from one person, the producer.
They can complain about anything, even about the writer's script.
Unless the producer has the respect and friendship of the creative team, matters like these can be very tricky to handle, with an emotional uproar and wasted time and money all around.
Equally, with the account group, the producer must work in an atmosphere of trust and cordial relations.
Because the account group is accountable to the client, it must be satisfied that things are going smoothly and are within budget.
The producer is a catalyst between account group, creative team and media department who have allocated the client's money to a particular schedule.
All these people should be kept in touch with what is happening during the various stages of production.
What are these stages?
An experienced producer at a major London agency was recently asked to list them for the benefit of newcomers.
She listed 56 (see page 111), although it is only fair to record that the 56th read: "Have nervous breakdown — client doesn't like film." 
So there are some 55 items which can go wrong with serious consequences.
Television producers need iron nerves and considerable stamina.
Initially, the problems concern money.
Having found out how much money the client has to spend, the producer must study the creative team's script and storyboard and work out whether it can be made for the money available.
A cast of thousands may have to be cut to seven.
A location in the Bahamas may have to become Bournemouth.
The script also has to be submitted to the ICTA for approval.
Only when the agency is satisfied that they have a film which can be made for the money and will be allowed on air should it be shown to the client.
If it is approved, the producer and creative team can then choose a production company and director, brief them and obtain a quote which the producer will go over with a  toothcomb , obtaining alternative quotes from other companies if necessary.
When the quote is agreed and the production confirmed by letter, meetings take place between the production company, the producer and the creative team to discuss casting, location, set designs and music.
Accurate notes need to be taken.
A casting session is then arranged and the location viewed if this is thought to be necessary.
If the client's product is to be shown, special labels to show up better on film may need to be ordered.
Finally, all these details together with an up-to-date shooting script are collated for the pre-production meeting at which the  client must agree casting, wardrobe, set drawings, shooting script, special packs and any other relevant matters.
The shoot takes place accompanied by the inevitable sequence of bacon butties, coffee, tea and cakes.
There is tension in the air — to run over time means spending more money.
Every detail must be watched.
Failure to notice an imperfection could mean an expensive re-shoot later.
After the shoot the agency team will see "rushes" , that is all the film that was shot.
When sequences are similar the team will indicate their preferences so a rough cut can be made by the editor, who joins all the desired sequences together and cuts the whole thing to the exact time.
In the meanwhile the producer is arranging to record voices and music.
These have to be mixed and dubbed onto one magnetic film.
 "Opticals" like titling mixes and dissolves are then put in hand and added to the "double head" as it is called when vision and sound are still on separate film.
At this point it should be seen by the ITCA, interested people at the agency and the client, as it is still possible to make alterations.
Sound and vision are then "married" onto one roll of film and graded, perhaps several times, to correct colour imbalance.
You then have your final or "Answerprint" ready to be transferred to video tape and sent to the stations to go out on air.
Concurrent with this programme of activity, there are dozens of administrative jobs to be done.
Apart from arranging all the necessary meetings, there is plenty of paper work concerning the actors"pay and repeat fees, details of music and musicians to be passed to the Performing Rights Society, a post-production script (what really happened) to be compiled or film to be transferred to tape, which is the way all commercials are now transmitted.
In contrast to television, radio may seem a simple matter.
The main difference is that there is no director.
Commercials are cast, the producer arranges a session with a recording studio, having previously chosen music and ordered any sound effects from the studio library.
The session will be attended by the creative team and the producer, who will act as a director.
The writer is very necessary as scripts often need to be re-vamped on the spot if they are running over time or don't sound right.
The finished tape is then sent to the agency to be heard by all interested parties.
Television departments vary in size and complexity from  agency to agency.
In the bigger agencies much of the routine administration is undertaken by progress or traffic people.
Producers probably will have Personal Assistants (PAs) who are trained to do the jobs for which the producers themselves haven't time.
Everyone seems to want to get into television to claim their share of fame and fortune.
For this reason, if you are lucky enough to get the chance to become a PA, because of the number of people trying to get started, you'll find pay isn't brilliant to begin with.
But according to your ability and initiative, you could well transfer to a production company or become a producer yourself.
Then possibly comes that share of fortune if not fame.
But remember: it is a very exacting job.
Hours are punishing, especially when you are shooting.
You are often out of your office so your desk tends to be piled high with papers when you return.
You must have a head for figures, a flair for administration, a grip of the technicalities and be able to follow new technical developments.
Keen awareness of new production companies, directors, jingle and music houses is vital and you need to tell your creative colleagues about them.
You should be interested in the cinema, television and music, anything and everything that stimulates, entertains, and provokes enthusiasm among people.
What are the rewards?
A lot of interest and variety in your life.
The occasional trip to Barbados, Hong Kong, even Sheffield.
The chance to meet your favourite TV idol.
And if you have what it takes and can stand the pace, a jolly good salary.
In fact, you could then easily say "hello" to that Porsche and a lot of other luxuries.
Production and progress
Producers, writers and art directors all come and go, but a production department is vital in an agency and here a certain stability reigns.
Such a department has the job of transforming creative department layouts and copy into the finished article: a newspaper or magazine advertisement, poster, brochure, leaflet, showcard, label or whatever.
This must be achieved as well as possible and for the best price.
It follows, then, that an extensive knowledge of reproduction printing, make up and materials is all-important if you work in production and progress.
So is a sound financial sense.
If this sounds a tall order, it is.
The impact of electronics has  revolutionised the printing business which continues to develop new technology in every branch of the trade — photo-typesetting and printing.
A good production person must keep up with every development and ideally acquaint the art directors with every one as well.
To read of the confrontations between newspaper owners and their staff, or rather the unions which represent them, you might think that this technology was a recent phenomenon.
This is far from the case.
Printers and typesetting houses have been embracing new methods for the last 15 years or so and now rely entirely upon them.
Such companies are highly competitive and welcome the colossal saving of time and money new methods represent.
So, of course, do you if you are a production person.
Your job, however, is made more difficult by the sheer number of the companies from which to choose.
One veteran production man says "There is always, somewhere, the right company for every job — the company with the right mix of machines." 
It is your function to choose that company, and to get the right results for the right price.
Sometimes you invite two or three companies to quote, so your negotiating skill is important.
Such service companies want your agency's business and lavish lunches and gifts are par for the course.
But as specialisation increases, such practices are dying out and the production chief who gives all his business to one or two companies is viewed with frank suspicion.
Good working relationships with suppliers are, however, very important.
A production person never knows when he will be asking a supplier to pull out all the stops and finish a job in a matter of hours.
Good relations with creative people are also essential, for you may have to advise the art director that the transparency he has chosen won't reproduce too well.
You will certainly have to show him and his writer every stage of the job so that they have the opportunity to make colour corrections and spot spelling mistakes.
Progress control
The progress of any piece of work from layout to final block ready for reproduction is monitored by the progress or traffic department with a special eye on timing.
The progress department or section is responsible for the final appearance of the advertisement in the right size, in the right publication, on  the right day.
The managing director of a big British agency, when he heard his colleagues saying that an agency stands or falls by its creative department used to reply, "No — it stands or falls by its progress control department." 
An over-simplification perhaps, but there isn't much doubt that a blank space in the newspaper isn't going to do an agency much good.
An unromantic but essential role is the progress chaser's lot.
Agencies vary in the way such matters--are organised.
The progress department is sometimes part of the production department and sometimes a separate entity.
Some agencies regulate the work in progress by issuing requisitions or job sheets (there are dozens of different names for such items) which include data and precise timings for every stage of the job.
The progress person should be aware when the creative team is dragging its feet or the account group is asking for the impossible.
Appropriate action must take place at once— you are dealing with realities, not wish-fulfilment, so you should be able to be sympathetic but firm.
In addition, you will need good relations with the media for you'll often find yourself ringing a newspaper asking for a couple of hours"grace.
Progress can provide an interesting job for the right person with the opportunity to rise.
A progress background can teach you a lot about what really happens if you're aiming to be an account executive.
3 Getting into advertising
Ever since the heroes in women's magazine stories started being advertising executives, advertising has been considered a "glamour" job.
Those doing it wouldn't necessarily agree, although most find it varied, exciting and often great fun.
For these reasons it is difficult to get into.
Competition is extremely keen.
There are no keys to unlock doors.
However well you try to equip yourself, qualifications are unlikely to be the decisive factor.
Your personality and style and what you can do matter far more than letters after your name.
For this reason it can be a mistake to try to break into advertising while you are too young.
Advertising is such a complicated business that you may be able to assimilate it better if you have spent a few years "knocking-around" — travelling perhaps, or working in a shop or doing different kinds of jobs.
It doesn't really matter what.
The important thing is that you'll be more confident and able to cope at, say, 21 than you were at 16.
A higher degree is certainly of value, if only as proof of intellectual ability, and can make the difference between getting an interview and not getting one.
Some major agencies have a regular intake of graduates for training schemes.
The Advertising Association and The Communication Advertising and Marketing Education Foundation (CAM)
The Advertising Association, Abford House, 15 Wilton Road, London SW1 represents all parties in advertising, agencies, clients and media and is an examining body for courses in advertising, public relations, marketing and communications.
There are two levels of examination on offer.
The Certificate is about basic concepts and covers some seven subjects.
The Diploma gives a choice of studying in depth three out of ten subjects.
The AA administers the CAM examinations but is not involved in tuition.
This is done through private colleges, correspondence courses, one or two state institutions such as The London College for Distributive Trades.
There is available for the certificate home study, where no tutor is involved but readings and notes are used for solo study.
CAM examinations are held in some polytechnics.
Further information is available from CAM at Abford House.
Examples of typical examination questions
Although questions on examinations differ from year to year, here are some from a recent CAM examination in Advertising:
QUESTION
You are the Account Director for a lawn mower manufacturer with a 50% market share and £1 million advertising budget.
The No. 2 brand (25%) is increasing advertising to £1.5 million and moving into television which your client does not use.
Prepare a budget recommendation together with the broad media strategy you would adopt to fight off the competition.
QUESTION
A leading client who is a major manufacturer of toiletries wishes to expand into higher priced, bigger margin and smaller volume markets which he believes can be reached through existing distribution channels.
As Account Director for the client's advertising agency, responsible for developing a proposed Advertising Strategy document, prepare a list of the information you would require for launching a new range of hair products.
QUESTION
Your client is a major supplier of household cleaning products, and has produced a really effective and long-lasting anti-static furniture polish which will sell at treble the price of his existing product.
He wishes to support a television advertising launch with a selective direct mail campaign containing an introductory product offer.
Discuss the merits of this approach and provide examples of how the mailing can be effectively directed to the best targets.
The Institute of Practitioners in Advertising, located at 44 Belgrave Square, London SW1 is the professional institute for UK advertising agencies.
It also runs courses available to the staff of all member agencies from the newcomer to senior personnel.
Special qualifications
Special qualifications required or desirable for the.
various branches of advertising are listed below.
However, when it comes to the crunch you will probably find yourself writing round to agencies asking for an interview.
You will need to consult the "blue book" the Advertisers Annual, and the Creative Handbook which you should be able to see in a public library.
If they do not have a copy ask if they can get one for you from their central library resource.
There are employment agencies in plenty who deal with advertising personnel.
They are listed in the Creative Handbook but most are only interested in already established people.
They may offer you advice.
Many general employment agencies place secretarial and other clerical staff in agencies.
If a friend offers to get you an interview, accept at once.
All interviews teach you something.
And remember, it often helps to get into an agency as a secretary or a messenger and to take it from there.
Now for more job specific qualifications:
Account services
A degree will help.
A few years' experience in commerce, particularly in marketing will help even more.
So will experience of a particular industry if relevant to the agency to which you are writing.
The Advertisers Annual lists an agency's accounts but these can go quickly out-of-date so check first.
If you are writing, include a brief account of your education and experience; also a stamped self-addressed envelope for a reply is appreciated.
Make sure you have spelt and addressed your letter correctly.
Some leading London agencies throw away all incorrectly addressed letters without reading them.
Media
A degree or qualifications in statistics are a big help.
A Media Business Course could help a lot.
Competition for agency jobs is so severe that you may find it easier to obtain an interview with the media itself — a TV contractor or newspaper and then make the transition to agency work a little later in your career.
There are a number of companies dealing with media only and represented by The Association of Media Independents but they tend to be highly specialised and are unlikely to take any inexperienced person.
Remember that many bright secretaries have made the transfer to media departments with great success.
Research
A degree is essential, preferably in psychology, economics or statistics.
You should then aim at getting into one of the major research companies.
You will find them listed in the Market Research Society Handbook.
Research opportunities are often advertised in The Economist.
Planner
You are most likely to achieve a planning position via account handling or research.
A few London agencies do, however, train promising applicants who hold suitable degrees.
The only way to find out is to apply.
Writing
Although the writer's job is one of the most sought after, there are very few organisations offering training, perhaps because it is difficult to create a really good writer this way.
The Watford College of Technology, Hempstead Road, Watford, Hertfordshire, is one exception.
Another is the Hounslow Polytechnic.
This state of affairs may change and it would always be worth checking with your nearest educational authority.
The newly founded School of Communication Art, Woodbridge House, 9 Heyward's Place, Clerkenwell Green, London EC1 is offering something more comprehensive and conceptual — but at a price.
It aims to give writers and art directors a thorough grounding of the advertising business and valuable first-hand experience.
It has an impressive list of collaborators and the first year's course has been fully subscribed.
Ask around among advertising writers and you will find they have got in through a dozen different doors: journalism, the entertainment business, being secretaries, or just by having a go.
If you do the latter you must take evidence of both ideas and writing ability.
It doesn't matter how rough they are.
Study the advertisements now appearing and show how you would have done them.
A good idea or imaginative writing always shines  out.
If you've got a spark, it will probably be recognised.
Agencies are always hungry for creative talent.
Art direction
For you, training is relatively straightforward.
You will have attended one of the many art schools or polytechnics.
Some of the latter are very successful at placing promising students with agencies.
Kingston, Middlesex, Liverpool, Newcastle upon Tyne, Bournemouth and Manchester are notable examples.
The new School of Communication Art mentioned above is also meant for you.
Before you start making applications, be very sure that it is advertising art direction which interests you.
If your talents are more those of an illustrator you should be applying to one of the commercial studios which supply agencies and magazines.
The Creative Handbook lists them.
If, as often happens, you decide that you would really rather be a writer than an art person, re-read the paragraphs under the heading Writing, about getting started in the writing side of the business.
Television
As has been described, television PAs are frequently found within the agency, probably working as secretaries.
They will then be trained by a producer and with luck will, in due course, become one themselves.
You could probably increase your chances by doing a TV or video course like the one organised by Morley College.
This lasts for three terms and gives you one three hour evening class every week.
Other courses are regularly advertised in the ILEA magazine, Floodlight.
Talk to your own local educational authority to find out what may be on offer.
Production and progress
A number of entrants to production and progress departments are promoted from humbler positions like messenger boys.
If this happens to you, you are lucky.
You will not only be embarking on an interesting and responsible job but could be laying a fine foundation for a career in account management.
One note of warning: Don't let your colleagues go on thinking  of you as the former messenger once you graduate to production.
Take pains to present a smart, efficient appearance and to show that you are beginning to master your subject.
If you approach production from school or university, your academic qualifications will be noticed and you will give yourself a push up the ladder if you gain more knowledge of your subject by attending a course in printing at your local polytechnic or somewhere like the London School of Printing.
You must be numerate.
Negotiating costs and staying within your client's budget is going to be a very important part of your job.
A talent to succeed
If the prospect of getting into advertising seems daunting, don't despair.
Few jobs are easy to get these days and, if you have set your sights on advertising, it must be worth extra effort.
This true story may encourage you: Some years ago, after what he now describes as "no education" Alan got a job as a messenger boy in a London agency.
He was 16 years old.
Observing what went on; he soon decided he would like a bigger share of the action.
After studying his agency's current advertising he worked out alternative campaigns, demonstrating how he would handle them.
A friend turned his ideas into layouts, although not very expert ones.
Soon he was showing them to the leading head-hunters in employment agencies.
Impressed, they passed him on to an agency with a good reputation for seeing young people.
Alan's ideas were so good that the Creative Director couldn't believe they were his and set him a difficult test which had to be carried out in the agency.
The test concerned a soft drink made from both orange and lemon juice.
Alan's solution showed unusual talent and originality.
He was, incidentally, the only applicant who hadn't named the drink St Clements, from the nursery rhyme.
He was engaged as a trainee copywriter, but not for long.
Within a year he had moved to a more creative agency and four years later was working at the then most creative agency in London.
He now runs a highly successful production company which bears his name and wins award after award.
Just one example of what talent and fortitude can do if you are determined to make advertising your career.
4 Public relations — the background
Public Relations is in many ways far more complex than advertising, because it functions over a wide spectrum of alternatives for a multitude of purposes.
It is a powerful weapon of persuasion.
Today Public Relations offers an increasingly comprehensive service in which definite specialities, like financial PR, are developing.
It is necessary, therefore, to grasp what public relations really means before you decide to spend time and effort trying to get a job in it.
Public relations is related to advertising in that both are about persuasion through communication.
Sometimes each is used by the other, in doing a campaign.
For example, advertising may support a campaign to drink more lager with an in-pub promotion organized by the public relations team — or a health education advertising campaign aimed at children may be supported by a public relations programme of activities in schools.
Likewise, public relations may use advertising to support or spearhead a publicity programme to reinforce messages.
Together advertising and public relations have a freedom and range of techniques at their disposal which advertising alone does not since public relations seeks to earn reputation and to persuade through opinion while advertising buys space or time in which to say exactly what it wants you to believe.
If advertising is as old as the first caveman who scrawled "Bonzo is the greatest Caveman" across a cave wall, then public relations must have started before Mankind learned to write.
The first time one person whispered in the ear of another to make or break a third person's reputation, then public relations was born.
Persuading people to a particular point of view is the essential aim of every public relations campaign, no matter how it may appear to be about products, concepts, policies, personalities, issues, or information and data.
Although the great American Thomas Jefferson in 1807 used the term "public relations" , and in England the pen was mighty and writers such as Swift and Dickens promulgated their ideas hoping to change public opinion about a whole host of social or scientific or political issues, until the First World War, public  relations was thought of as propaganda.
Today we view propaganda in a dim light, thinking it a tool of unscrupulous politicians or others who wish to control us.
In America, image-making started early when at the beginning of this century, wealthy John D  Rockefeller Jr, hired a press agent to change his image from that of a mean old rich man to that of philanthropist.
The press agent succeeded by having  Rockefeller give money to charity.
But the First World War gave a real boost"to public relations when governments created massive campaigns to help get mass popular support behind the war effort.
One man of great influence in public relations, Edward L Bernays, a nephew of Sigmund Freud, emerged during this time in America.
He felt that public relations was the engineering of human consent — getting people to agree to an idea, product, concept or what have you.
This definition still works well today.
His Crystallising Public Opinion (1923) is considered to be the first book dealing exclusively with public relations.
The First World War gave organized public relations in Britain an opportunity to be used on a national scale and official publicity was carried out by a number of organizations.
A new Ministry of Information was set up when the Second World War broke out.
The publicity generated about how to use food, save fuel, and a hundred other matters are all well recorded.
(From time to time, these are discussed on radio and TV.)
After the war, the Central Office of Information (COI) was established.
It remains the major source of information on behalf of the government.
The COt releases information abroad as well as within Britain.
While advertising had long been favoured by British industry, public relations was hardly used until the beginning of the 1950s.
Even then, this was a blend of press relations and promotional work.
During those years several consultancies emerged and a number of public relations practitioners arose who became, in a real sense, founders of modern British public relations.
Among these was Mrs Gina Franklin whose career illustrates the development of consultancies and methodology in Britain.
She went to America, studied under Dr Bernays, and returned to Britain determined to create a company specializing in public relations.
This company, at first attached to an advertising agency, later became an independent public relations consultancy.
At first her campaigns concentrated on press relations, and  promotional-based publicity.
But as the years passed and British Industry became more sophisticated in recognizing and using the potential of public relations, Franklin changed her approach until she based all her campaigns on concepts likely to be admired even today by any leading consultant on either side of the Atlantic.
Perhaps more than any other person, she opened the public relations field in Britain to women.
In her early days, looking for something that would make her consultancy just that little bit different, she chose to have an all-women agency.
Looking her potential clients right in the eye, she would say: Women buy your products, why not have women help you publicise them — women understand women".
Then, she would trot out an array of fresh, original ideas backed up by a parade of articulate, intelligent and experienced public relations women.
What client wouldn't have succumbed to Mrs Franklin's consultancy?
To illustrate the conceptual basis of her thinking when arriving at a public relations platform on which to build a campaign for a consumer client, no better example could be found than her approach to the problem of one international manufacturing giant.
When told by them that the sales of budgerigar seed were disastrous and the market might easily disappear within a few years, Mrs Franklin came back with what you may think was a simple answer — but it was profound in terms of changing British public opinion — she said, "Breed your own consumers." 
And she set out to do just that by making the little budgie one of Britain's most popular pets.
When Britain loved budgies, seed sales soared.
This is to make a long, hard, thoughtful, and imaginative campaign sound simple, which it wasn't.
However, it puts well, I think, the case that the real basis of any public relations solution should be able to be captured in a few words which reflect the concept involved.
Finding new methods and ideas always attractive, Franklin steadily incorporated new academic studies and scientific methods, such as behavioural psychology and social auditing, into her work.
The barriers she broke down about women in business are numerous because she moved as an equal among commercial interests which were so much then, as now, dominated by men.
Men as well as women in British public relations today owe her a debt of gratitude for her contribution in helping British industry come to terms with public relations as a formidable management and marketing tool.
Public relations and society
Public relations does not enjoy a very fair image in Britain.
Too many people think public relations is out to hide something or to confuse issues and somehow work against society's best interests.
The media, major users of public relations material, loves taking the mickey out of public relations which is so busy working on someone else's image that they have no time for the image of their own industry.
While working in public relations in America is highly respectable, in Britain somehow the idea that someone is paid to plead a special case or to be employed to persuade the public is thought "wrong" .
As public relations is offered within management, marketing, and social studies courses at more and more universities and colleges; as the various professional public relations organizations and professional bodies mature; as the public relations field becomes one of increasing speciality skills, so using public relations will become, like advertising and marketing, just another tool of modern management.
A place where good careers may be made.
However, those in public relations do have a clear duty to consider the effects of their campaigns in the public sector for they operate with the powerful forces of media, information, social groups, and opinion formers.
It does no good to pretend that public relations is not a formidable instrument of change — it is, and you will have to make value judgements.
The age of information
The sheer volume of information available in our society has rapidly grown and the messages to everyone have proliferated.
We are in the Age of Information.
As this bombardment has grown so have the services surrounding it, and public relations is the leading contender to see that one bit of information or message gets through amid the onslaught of mass media advertising and other information providers like the media that constantly continue to assail.
The study of how we receive and deal with information and how information is actually communicated are now fields of academic study.
The current public relations practitioners in Britain hardly touch the surfaces of the discoveries about human behaviour that are readily available to them.
In fact, most people in public relations agencies are not highly educated  in the fields most likely to be of importance to them in their work.
Yet they get along.
Indeed, many draw very high salaries, run profitable businesses, have satisfied clients, and some become millionaires.
How is this possible if the art of persuasion is such a highly skilled task?
The answer rests in what work is asked of public relations today.
If such skills are not necessary for the campaigns wanted or the solutions needed, then why bother?
This is changing fast, and clients are more and more wanting advice and action that calls for considerable finesse, knowledge, and intelligence.
Those planning to enter public relations in the future will not be able to offer superficial solutions or thinking to any client.
A quick look at just a few areas of today's public relations work confirms that prediction:
Social issue pressure on manufacturers
Post-industrial society and capitalism
Vested interests and central legislation
Social intervention and engineering tasks (eg health education on drug abuse)
Community relations and law and order
Politics and Parliamentary influences
Financial image-making for international companies and Third World development
Crisis management.
The business of public relations
The public relations function is increasingly used by a wide variety of interests.
Following in the footsteps of advertising agencies who gained great riches and new respectability when many became  publicly quoted companies, public relations as a business "came of age" in the early 1980s when the first consultancy went public on the Unlisted Securities Market.
Since then others have followed suit.
This is bringing increased respectability to public relations as a worthwhile commercial undertaking with a stability and purpose in the world of business.
It must be said, however, that this emerging new image for consultancies has been helped enormously by the fact that these quoted consultancies are substantially based in financial public relations which, of course, the City of London, Merchant Banks, and business interests in general do understand and accept as a legitimate part of their world.
Gradually the business community as a whole will accept that such service  industries, in spite of the constant winning and losing of clients, are here to stay and probably are a permanent part of that constantly expanding commercial sector, communications.
Today there is a very mixed bag of public relations workers and organisations.
There are the consultancies.
These may be small operations with one or two senior public relations executives with a shared secretary, with sufficient turnover to make a good living.
There are medium size consultancies, many of which specialise in consumer, industrial or financial clients.
The large consultancies, employing from 50 to 100 people, have all the trappings and functions of any sizeable modern company.
With bigger overheads, these have to charge economical fees and can often be undercut by the medium agencies in doing exactly the same programme of work.
Small consultancy operators and free-lancers dart in and out, bringing a highly personalized service and offering what may appear to be a cheap rate for the job.
Often these operators do one-off projects as these can be uneconomical for larger outfits.
Some public relations consultancies belong to advertising agencies.
In the future, consultancies which are established specialists in one kind of public relations service may well emerge as the most profitable of operations, just as financial PR has proven the money spinning PR speciality of the 1980s.
The function of public relations
Public relations is the most flexible communication method available to management.
It can communicate across a broad and general spectrum, or it can operate very specifically as a corporate, management or marketing tool.
The primary purpose of any public relations programme is to act on opinion.
It does this by communicating messages from the company to defined publics.
These messages have one or more aims.
They may seek to:
Change a widely help opinion, if this no longer reflects the true status or position of the company and its products.
Create a new opinion or attitude, based perhaps on new products or to pave the way for the introduction of long term plans.
Reinforce those opinions and attitudes already held where  they still reflect what the company wants them to be, and thus protect the status quo.
Correct an opinion, which has altered from either failure to reinforce it, or from greater activity from third parties, notably and usually competitors.
Public relations is thus concerned with a company or brand reputation which must be such that it gives people confidence in the company, providing the company with total credibility.
Who works in public relations?
The abilities, education, talents, and ages of the people who work in public relations could not be less standardized or more dissimilar.
When you first look around at the staff of a public relations consultancy, you might think "what a motley crew this lot is" .
You could be right, for many people have drifted from one job to another and finally ended up in public relations.
A closer look, however, would probably show you that each of these people has some talent or experience that is useful either in carrying out public relations or directly relevant to the client for whom they work.
Today, there are ex-advertising, ex-Army, ex-secretarial, ex-industry, ex-legal, ex-everything people in the public relations business.
But it is increasingly a professional and commercial business where "amateurs" are not welcomed.
The younger the persons in public relations the more likely they will have a university degree or other higher education qualification.
They may have risen through the ranks of secretarial work or come from journalism.
Until the mid-1970s a great many public relations workers came from the media.
It was a favourite thing to hire journalists for they presumably knew how to write good press releases and would have excellent contacts in the media world.
In fact, a journalism background was once one of the qualifications for public relations.
Now that public relations is such a highly skilled management tool, consultancies are demanding and getting graduates, some with doctorates, and those qualified in other professions such as the law.
Public affairs, local authority, government, financial, and charity public relations all call for different talents so the people working in these areas often have very different educational backgrounds and work experience from those doing consumer public relations.
London and regional public relations consultancies
The majority of public relations staff are found in London or regional consultancies and within commercial companies.
Others are to be found in local authorities, party political offices, central government, trade associations and professional organizations, trade unions and the media.
Public relations for any of these operations is normally a year-round effort.
Many have their public relations function handled by an outside consultancy as well as by an internal public relations officer.
Who does what in public relations?
Those who work in consultancies are usually arranged in the following  hierarchy , starting with the top person.
Managing director
Primary function is to get new business for his company, decide policy, see clients remain happy, and turn in good profits.
Many Managing Directors are first-class PR operators and may well execute client programmes.
Directors and senior consultants
These are the most experienced operators, directing and managing one or more clients and their PR campaigns, and supervising teams of PR staff who carry out the various projects and activities of each campaign.
These senior PR personnel attend many different kinds of meetings, write new business presentations, PR proposals and reports, and usually are seen in action during crisis PR situations and when major and important high-points in a campaign are happening.
They work over a wide range of campaigns and for many different kinds of clients.
Public relations executives
Here are the "Indians" in the PR team for these are the people who carry out all the various activities of a client's PR programme.
They may specialize, for example, in press relations, consumer PR or financial PR, or public affairs.
Client and media meetings happen almost daily in their work.
They normally commission outside work like printing leaflets or posters.
Assistant public relations executives
These are the less experienced operators who help run PR programmes under close supervision from more experienced operators.
Secretarial staff
Secretaries work for one or more executives and usually become very involved in the day-to-day PR work of the PR team in which they serve.
It is hard work but the variety makes it stimulating and exciting.
Many secretaries go on to become assistant PR executives.
In-house public relations executive
In-house public relations means someone working as a direct employee for the company they serve; such people, often called a Publicity Manager, face the difficult task of pleasing many masters.
In a manufacturing company, he or she may not only do public relations for the Board of Directors and the general information about the company as a whole, but may also have to satisfy a marketing department who demand the benefits of public relations for their products.
They are usually called upon to advise management in situations where the company is exposed to adverse opinion.
A good in-house person makes a list of issues likely to stir up trouble in the media or public sector, and keeps it up to date.
Here is what Norman Burtt, for over 30 years the public relations manager at Lever Brothers, has to say about what you need to be a company PR manager: 1Total honesty — with your employers, your staff, your "public" and the media.
2Ability to be at ease with people in all walks of life.
3Ability to spot possible developments from what, at first glance, seems a situation of little potential danger.
4Ability to identify people and areas where a relationship needs to be established.
5Realisation that there is no substitute for a face-to-face relationship (classic current example — Reagan/Gorbachev).
6Have the courage to admit you and your Company have "boobed" if that is the case.
7 Be prepared to act as the diplomat within your Company.
8 Have a sense of humour — and use it.
Consultancy in-house services
Marketing, research, and especially financial or accounts, are departments which may be found inside a consultancy.
A marketing department is a relatively new feature for consultancies and usually only the large ones will have a department devoted exclusively to marketing.
Smaller consultancies always have someone, whether the managing director or a senior executive, who is responsible for marketing the consultancy to potential clients.
You may use a marketing department to assist in the preparation of presentations to prospective new clients.
Most often the marketing department is kept busy chasing leads for getting new business.
When one of these turns hot", the other members of staff join in the chase — preparing reports, thinking who they know who may put them in touch with the potential new client.
If you use a marketing department for any reason, you will need to prepare a proper brief which includes what you want, when you need it by, the reasons for the request, and how much time you may think fitting for them to spend on your request.
These same guidelines serve when using your research department.
The job of such a department is to obtain an endless number of facts, figures, services, reports, contacts and details.
Both the marketing and research functions are frequently involved in expert services of a technological nature.
For example, setting up visual aids for presentations, laying on special effects, getting slides made, preparing reports, and putting together material from outside services.
It is almost impossible now to service a major client without such internal specialists at your elbow to help.
Again, if you are going to use a research department in your agency, you will want to put in your requests on a formal basis giving them time to fulfil the task.
Every business must have an accounts function where income and expenditure book-keeping is done.
It may be just a part time book-keeper or it may be a large department with frequent visits from outside chartered accountants and auditors.
The public relations business is no different from any other business in this respect.
Make friends with your accounts department at the first opportunity.
If you have a query about money, they usually have the answer.
5 Earning reputations
You have a reputation.
You earned it by what you did and what you forgot to do, by what other people — your family, schoolmates, friends, and the community at large— think about you.
Exactly the same thing happens with a company and its products.
Going about the place telling everyone what a fine fellow you are does little to improve your image.
Most will think "Now what is he up to this time?" .
The same thing often happens to a manufacturer when he believes he can buy the public's good opinion of him.
Advertising and public relations can try to improve or change the image of a client but this is always limited by the nature of how the reputation was built and earned in the first place and how the client will really act in the future.
Public relations enhances and protects reputations by ensuring the activities of the company are communicated to and understood by wider publics, so that each group's good opinions reinforces the other in an unbroken circle of APPROVAL.
In doing this, public relations creates confidence in a company's management and its products, which builds credibility.
This becomes more important when new products are introduced bearing a brand name normally associated with dissimilar products.
There is, therefore, a wide spectrum of company life where public relations may operate and make a commercial contribution to the company's success.
There is a growing relevance of these to the activities of our large public quoted companies.
For example:
1
Issue management
All relevant situations are analysed and advice given on how to handle them.
At its best, this is a planned approach, designed not only to maximise potential benefits to the company, but also to minimise possible damage.
This approach means the company is not on the defensive and, thus, at a disadvantage.
It will, instead, control in the offensive from an agreed position.
The totally unexpected, however, happens, but an issue management system will react quickly and with finesse.
2
Communication frameworks
Creating the form, content and tone of the messages to relevant publics, and the method of selling them to ensure maximum impact.
3
Engineering consent
A public relations approach should engineer a receptive climate of opinion, a paving of the way, for company activities and their positive and enthusiastic acceptance by trade and consumer.
4
Social audit
Work in commerce and finance brings public relations executives into contact with a wide range of social groups.
-This provides a heightened consciousness of attitudinal and social change.
Part of the public relations function is to feed this information back to the company.
Public relations must view proposed company activities against the tenets of "public opinion" .
5
Added value
A cost effective aspect of public relations is to give Added Value"to all the other marketing and sales programmes.
This can be as simple as good press publicity coverage for a trade event or a sales incentive scheme.
6
Marketing support
The strategies and tactics of the public relations service are always sharply focused and aligned to the marketing objectives when brand public relations work is done.
But the inter-relation of this to the first five public relations functions is sometimes overlooked by marketing departments in their desire to measure brand sales achievement directly to brand public relations tactical results.
Measurement must and should take place, but every successful public relations tactic achieves its short-term goals, and contributes to moulding the longer term attitudes and patterns of public opinion.
It is this longer term "engineering of human consent" where public relations can become a formidable instrument of change.
In the above we have talked about companies, but these concepts also apply to government and local government, trade unions, charities, in fact all and any organisation.
Image-making
Everything has an image.
It may be good, bad, or indifferent.
Every client talks about the image of his product, company or services.
Ask him to write down in a few words what he thinks his present image is, and what he wants his image to be, and he will most likely fail to do it.
So you must help him with these definitions.
Market research is the first place you go to help solve this initial problem.
You may need to conduct special research among consumers, the client's own employees, the trade whom he serves, and among the media.
When you have gathered together as much information as possible you set about defining your client's image.
Since image is what people think, feel, or believe, your client and you could be in for a surprise — one that may be more shocking than pleasing.
As images are hard to shake and difficult to change, you have a proper public relations job on your hands.
No matter whether or not you have an assignment which specifically calls for image work, you are always doing image work on behalf of your client.
For example, you may be asked to give your opinion on how a promotional scheme might affect the image of his product and company.
It sounds easy but it is hard work, especially when trying not to crush creativity or step on the toes of hardworking marketing and advertising departments.
Opinion formers
We do not hold a particular idea of the reputation of a product or a company in isolation.
We arrive at such an opinion in many different ways and through many influences.
Within our society are groups which are called opinion formers because they influence the opinions of many other people.
These opinion formers may be groups or individuals.
A super sports star is likely to help form opinions among teenage boys and that is why such personalities may be used in health education messages to promote a certain life style.
In every community there are groups of people who help form your opinions about a whole range of things.
For example, health visitors may influence young mothers in how they view processed baby food.
So in addition to the powerful forces of modern media, we have the equally powerful but natural forces of opinion formers all around us.
Such groups and individuals are far ranging.
Here are just a few found in everyday life: TV personalities, sports  clubs, women's clubs, and local authority politicians.
Almost every public relations programme must identify and reach opinion forming groups and individuals.
In almost all campaigns there are three pivotal points on which tactics are built: the opinion former targets, the consumer or primary user targets, and the media targets.
There may also be trade and industry targets.
Prime target: the under-35 year old housewife with children
A prime target is one which you must reach, the secondary target is one which you should reach.
In Britain the prime consumer target is the housewife, particularly the housewife under 35 years of age and with at least one child under five years old.
She has to spend the household money and her good opinion of products means sales.
Writing PR proposals and reports
As a public relations consultant it is assumed you can write and speak with skill and authority.
Proposals and reports are business documents.
They should be easy to read, fluent and logical in presenting the facts, ideas and rationales.
1
A summary of the situation and why public relations is needed
2
Achievable strategy
3
Creative approaches
4
Targets
5
Tactics
6
Operational techniques
7
How achievement will be measured
8
Fees and expenses
9
Conditions of the service offered.
There are many more features that can be and are included in public relations proposals but the above are a good foundation.
Consumer public relations
For the near future public relations work in the consumer field is apt to continue to be the major area for in-take of new employees.
While financial PR, industrial PR and public affairs  are all growing, there will probably remain more opportunities in the consumer area for new entrants.
While manufacturers say what they like about themselves through advertising, favourable public opinion for their products or services is earned.
The earning of a good reputation is really what consumer public relations is all about.
Public opinion is not just one view held by society, it is made up of many positive and negative opinions by individuals and groups throughout the country.
When the negatives outweigh the positive, then dramatic things may happen.
White sliced bread versus wholemeal bread is a simple example of this change at work.
Public opinion turned slowly against bread in general because it was considered "fattening" .
Bread sales slumped.
In recent years, nutritional and health education publicity has convinced an ever growing number of people to eat wholemeal bread because fibre is good for their health.
Bread sales have increased for this kind of loaf.
It is now possible to buy wholemeal bread in most village shops as well as in towns and cities.
Big manufacturers too often lag behind in knowing what the public wants in spite of their marketing departments.
The employees in such departments are often out of touch with changes in public opinion, relying instead on research data which may not be framed in a context most likely to discover what changes of attitude are occurring in consumer habits.
Reaching the consumer
There are a number of ways you will reach the consumer.
These ways are often referred to as vehicles or methods in public relations practice, because it is through them that messages may be sent to consumers.
Many of these methods are used throughout the practice of public relations.
Practitioners often feel that the number of methods open to them is limited, but as communications grow and change so new methods develop.
For example, with TV came video tapes and with radio a whole new system for sending recordings out using the voice rather than the written word.
Here are some methods used in public relations work:
Press relations
Public relations people quickly learn to develop expertise in  press relations if they want to stay in their jobs.
If you handle a consumer product for a manufacturer you deal with members of the press on an hour to hour basis.
They may call you for product details or information about the company which makes the product.
Consumer interests writers may want leaflets about your product and how to use it.
You will see journalists to explain your client's work and products.
You may hold or attend press conferences to announce news or show a product range.
You will be writing many press releases during a year's work.
Many press releases are poorly written, irrelevant to the newspaper or journal to which they have been sent, often are mailed to the wrong person on a publication, and are incredibly boring.
So learn to think creatively about your product before writing about it.
Books about journalism will show how to go about constructing an interesting article.
Such references can be an excellent foundation for correctly writing press releases.
You will rarely make "hard news" — that is factual reporting of an event — but there is an increasing number of pages devoted to articles and features about the background to events and matters of general interest in all publications.
These provide an excellent opportunity for press relations work.
Schools, polytechnics and universities all have magazines and newspapers on which you may gain actual experience while still a student.
As public relations, and hence press relations, becomes more professional and expert, and as journalists need more ideas and information, so there is growing a greater recognition by media of the role public relations can play in a positive way to help them.
Contributing to this attitude is the recognition that public relations is a growth industry serving a wide range of interests in our society.
Information bureaux and services
A favourite but much over-worked vehicle for public relations is the information service or bureau for a manufacturer.
The idea is that, say, a Domestos Hygiene Advisory Service, a Clarks Health Education Service, or a Butter Information Bureau, all channel information efforts about a product through a focal point, thus gaining better attention from the media, lending an increased air of respectability to what is being done for commercial reasons, and acting as a voice on behalf of the area of expertise in which the manufacturer operates.
Award schemes
There are now so many awards sponsored by so many consumer interests that the mind boggles.
Soon everyone will be able to win an award and, as Andy Warhol predicted, we will all be famous for fifteen minutes.
However, awards can be an excellent means of creating interest and building image for your client's company and products, especially by a particular group in society whose goodwill your client wants.
For example, the client's consumer might be the catering industry where workers must follow rigid health and safety rules supervised by health authorities, and so approval of your client's cleaning products (however passively given) by Environmental Health Officers might be a decided advantage.
So an award by the company to the catering industry, which was approved by the Health Offices, might help achieve your goal.
Giving awards also means holding a ceremony and this too can attract the attention of the media.
Exhibitions and trade shows
Exhibitions and trade shows work well when they are carefully mounted and the reasons for attending are commercially sound.
You need to set down at the start what you expect to achieve.
Press relations activities must go on during the exhibition with media who attend or may be interested.
Having decided with your client that he should be at a particular exhibition or trade show, you will embark on a number of activities.
You must recommend the size of his exhibition and prepare a budget for it.
When approval is given, you start planning his stand and displays.
Planning may well involve other experts such as designers, display construction and removal contractors.
You will submit a design for approval to your client and put this in hand with builders.
Space must be booked and you will recommend how the exhibition is to be staffed.
You will be on-site for the mounting of the exhibition.
In fact, you are most likely to have brought armfuls of leaflets and boxes of information sheets with you, as well as shopping bags of product samples.
Control of the staffing and generally overseeing the smooth and successful operation of the show is necessary.
For some events your clients may participate in a trade show or exhibition and simply ask that you take care of press relations  during it and help look after important visitors.
Exhibitions and trade shows are expensive but good ways to promote a message or an image and are often used for direct selling.
Timetables, transportation, advertising, publicity, staffing and administration of the exhibition, travel and accommodation of yourself and staff and perhaps the client, as well as printing and production of suitable literature are just a few of the many items comprising your work when you recommend an exhibition be undertaken.
From time to time, consultancies must organise not just a display by a client but must organise an entire exhibition or show for many exhibitors are on behalf of their client.
This is a major undertaking and constitutes a special project in terms of budgeting, staffing and timing.
There are a number of companies who specialise in mounting and running exhibitions.
While these may take most of the burden from the public relations officer's shoulders, there is still work that can only be done by you.
Exhibitions and trade shows work can be great fun — there is a chance to meet many new faces, stay in good hotels, have jolly meals with new-found colleagues and for a few days live in a different and, almost always, pleasant if busy world.
Sponsorship
The PR method of sponsorship of a product, name, or cause is now big business with huge sums of money involved, especially in motor rally and sports sponsorship.
There are both national and international companies who deal exclusively in sponsorship schemes and personalities.
It is all very costly and there is sometimes a limited choice of what is available for your client to sponsor that makes economic sense and will attract media and consumer attention.
Films and videos
Films are giving way now to videos as a PR method of communicating, for videos are generally cheaper and can be easily seen by many more people.
Film and video companies exist who will do the script, production and distribution of such materials.
A good understanding of video making and its potential will help you in your PR work.
Education as a public relations activity
Commercial enterprises, such as banks and food manufacturers, may all have educational PR programmes, as do some non-commercial organizations such as the British Dental Association and the Health Education Council.
One major educationally based public relations campaign mounted in recent years was that for Information Technology Year on behalf of the Government.
Some banks in the past have distributed banking educational games devised for use in school to teach young people about banking and the use of money.
The attachment of a particular bank's name to the game generates goodwill from teachers and parents — today's customers — and helps recognition of the bank among students at an early age — tomorrow's customers.
This benevolent commercialism does little harm, but educationalists rightly want only that which really serves their students"interests.
One campaign by a leading washing powder manufacturer went into schools with an educational programme because it was an effective way of reaching the mothers who were its prime target.
An educational lesson was devised involving each primary school child with a coloured card of a house.
The child had to take the card home and get different fabric cuttings from her or his Mum.
These were brought back to school and curtains and rugs were cut out of the fabrics for the house, each being labelled as to the fibre, eg wool, cotton, silk, polyester, nylon.
The teacher then involved the class in discussions about these fabrics and the fibres in them.
This became an excellent and creative lesson.
One has only to think of the remarkable story of growing, harvesting, and weaving cotton with its social and industrial history to realize the enormous learning potential of such a project.
The child involved the mother at home in the project by hunting out scraps of fabric, discussing what they were, then bringing back home the finished house.
A teaching pack was sent separately to the teacher for her use in this project.
In this way three different groups were used, each linking with the other — the teacher who is both an opinion former and a consumer, the child who learns about the manufacturer and may become a potential future customer and who acts as a messenger to the mother who is the manufacturer's prime commercial and marketing target.
Financial public relations
This speciality has been the big growth area for PR in recent years.
You will need a degree or professional qualifications, preferably law or accountancy, unless you are already an established financial journalist or parliamentarian.
Your work will cover the following main areas:
Maintaining the confidence of a company's shareholders, investment analysts, and the media by a regular flow of information on aims and achievements.
Dealing with special situations such as takeovers and mergers, transferring from private to public company.
Stock exchange procedures and regulations.
International capital markets — PR strategies related to international quotations and fund raising.
Financial public relations and the media
The financial media whether printed or broadcast, is the life-blood of the financial public relations consultant.
He must always be on the move with those who influence, control and make the complex world of finance go round, and this includes those in the media concerned with money, investment, and economics.
Financial media normally has immediate and easy access to any client.
Top financial journalists can make and break company reputations.
If you work in financial public relations you are not a generalist — you are a keen specialist for your work is not, as you might suppose, just about money but about investment, capital, tax, financial packages and products, stocks, shares, bonds, management and corporate reputations.
There is a lot to learn about financial media.
Start now by reading the Financial Times regularly.
Special interest public relations
The environment is a popular topic these days and there are many special conservation groups all around the country.
These are just one kind of special interest group.
Perhaps a group dedicated to the conservation of a particular kind of architecture has started in your area.
This group must put across its views and gain popular support and understanding for its campaign.
Putting up posters and sending out press releases is no longer really enough in the face of so much publicity effort by so many  special interest groups these days.
Why not join a local group of some kind in whose fight you believe and try to improve the quality and extent of their public relations?
Specialization in public relations
In the United States, public relations has divided itself into a great many specialities so that if you want to employ public relations to handle, say, a health issue, you go to someone who specializes in health communications.
If you are interested in public affairs, which is usually political in nature, you go to a public affairs expert.
In Britain we are behind in this specialization of public relations.
However, it is coming fast.
Two areas of public relations speciality already well defined and established here are financial public relations and industrial relations practice.
The latter is a recognized field of work in its own right and some people in it might be surprised to find themselves called public relations operators, but the speciality derives from public relations and the counselling, reconciliatory and persuasive nature of the work comfortably fits it within the broader spectrum of public relations practice.
Public affairs is rapidly becoming a speciality in Britain.
Parliamentary lobbying has long been one.
The next major speciality for public relations is apt to be health relations.
This may or may not include the present health promotion and education work of health educators as we now understand it.
With an ageing population, limited national resources and, perhaps less than efficient administrators, health service management will need the function of professional public relations as much as industry and government now do.
A study of books published in America about public relations will prove very useful to you as you consider the direction your career in public relations might take in the longer term.
Community relations
In our large and varied society, communication needs frequently arise in local authorities, social services, voluntary organisations, and others concerned in public life when professional advertising and public relations are needed.
The reason that such diverse interests need public relations is obvious when you consider how much information many of them have to get across to ordinary people.
In many cases, it is important that such people  are persuaded to a particular point of view which is to their benefit or that of the community as a whole.
Local authority public relations takes place at the "grass roots" of our society where local issues, local life styles and local politics take place.
Public affairs and political public relations
That public relations can have power in the arena of public affairs is endorsed when you read the codes of conduct for public relations people by their professional organizations, such as the IPR.
In America, public affairs is the name given to public relations dealing with the public life of the nation.
 "Lobbying" is a familiar term also applied to such work.
In America this is an open attempt to put across a particular view to Members of Congress.
Here, Members of Parliament are "lobbied" but far more subtly.
Many believe that paid special pleading with MPs is wrong in that some may be able to afford it and others not, so that those with money have an unfair advantage in putting across their points of view.
Things are changing and work in public affairs will probably become as accepted and widely used in Britain as it is in the United States.
Those who rise to the top in public affairs work can expect social recognition as well as good financial rewards.
Industrial public relations
As a public relations executive you may be involved in work during industrial disputes, the moving or opening of a client factory, large scale redundancies, or other employment changes to your client's company.
Close liaison with the industrial relations officer and the personnel director are key factors in your work being successful.
Your job will probably be to handle the media and advise and counsel your client on image and corporate behaviour during any industrial crisis.
Day-to-day work otherwise may consist of doing ordinary press and public relations work for your client as part of an industry, for example, as a manufacturer of components to the automobile industry.
6 The Media
Public relations sends messages, and the most powerful transmitter is the media — newspapers, books, magazines, TV, radio, video tapes, films and recordings.
The role of the media is founded on distribution and interpretation of information.
There is much argument about the role of the media in our society.
Much time is spent studying its influence, and universities offer courses on Media.
Politicians argue for and against it: Should we have polls just before elections?
Is there too much news and information?
Is there an over — kill of information?
No person could take in all the information available on TV alone in one day.
Is the role of the media then only to present information to us with objectivity and factually?
Once upon a time this was the role everyone thought was the right and moral one, but the immense power of television to influence, and the rapid growth of communications, makes such definitions naive.
The media influences how we see ourselves and our society and not just the events of the day.
Media is all-invasive and, some would say, all-persuasive, but it has a fundamental and significant role in our life for it forms a communication network between communities, between industry and industry and between government and people.
In public relations you'll have to make friends with this powerful force and master it.
The relationship of public relations and the media
 "You can't live with them and you can't live without them" may sum up for many public relations people their relationship with the media.
You need and will no doubt enjoy a good working relationship with many journalists and publications.
On the other hand, public relations is often looked down on by the media as messengers with stories that hold no interest and which will be presented in the wrong way at the wrong time and in the wrong situation.
Even worse, some think public relations stands in the way of getting at the real facts.
Don't let this stop you, for the media lives on information.
Without you and your information, the media would dry up fast.
True, the great majority of press releases go in the waste-paper  basket.
True, many journalists attend press receptions and lunches for free food and to see colleagues.
But it is also true that journalists and editors know full well that public relations is an important source of information for their work and often can be the instrument through which they may obtain their story.
The relationship of the media and public relations has slowly grown more professional over the years.
For a long time, the public relations industry had a great number of former journalists working on it.
Financial public relations still has.
When most public relations was writing press releases and liaising with the media, this experience was invaluable, but as public relations has become more sophisticated and developed its skills and functions, so a journalism background has become less important.
Still, there is a relationship between the public relations functions of distributing information and persuading people and the same functions at work in the media.
Public relations is much maligned about its influence on the media.
It is true that public relations contrives news and events and gets photographs in newspapers which are really just promotional efforts.
But in important issues and debates public relations can see that an alternative point of view is put to the media.
It can arrange access for a journalist and make his job easier.
Good public relations helps media to be competent in covering the events, news and stories of the day.
The national press
These are newspapers which have a national circulation such as The Times, The Guardian and The Daily Mail.
Each of these has a different editorial policy and, to a lesser or greater degree, a political bias.
The public relations worker studies these differences, called "profiles" , so that she knows which paper is best suited for her information to get the best response.
The story which is ideal for the Sunday Telegraph may not be of very much interest to The News of the World.
An exercise you can do to get a picture of the difference between newspapers is to go to the library and read each daily in turn.
What kind of stories do they seem to prefer?
How does each interpret the same story?
An earthquake in Mexico will be reported more or less the same by each, but what about the Labour Party Conference or a murder down on a Devon farm?
Style is important as well to newspapers.
Each tries to make the potential reader want to buy his newspaper.
Much time and  effort is spent on getting the front page to look inviting.
A great many people are involved in putting out a newspaper.
While, modern techniques in printing are revolutionizing newspaper production, many different people will still have worked on just one story before you read it.
To say that it is difficult to get your client's story into a national newspaper is an understatement.
Yet it happens daily to some public relations person somewhere.
How does this happen?
It can be a matter of good timing — and timing as well as luck plays a part in working with nationals.
On the hand it most likely to be because the subject discussed is of great interest to the newspaper's readers.
The announcement that your manufacturer has brought out a washing powder that does away with washing machines would make every front page.
The fact that the powder contains a new scientific break-through might interest some.
The fact that you say his powder is "new" will most likely interest no one.
When you start in public relations, you need to meet journalists who work on the newspapers: press receptions, product launches, pubs around Fleet Street, the Press Club — there are many ways to do this.
A PR person working in London has decided advantages over one in the provinces.
All this sounds complicated but it isn't.
National newspapers thrive and live on the publicity material and information generated by public relations people no matter who they represent.
Like a great hungry beast, all media needs constant feeding with information.
Regional newspapers
There are a number of regional newspapers and these publications have distinctive styles and defined readership areas.
It is unlikely that you will get journalists from a regional newspaper to London to attend a function, although a number have a London representative.
You will mail them your information and then perhaps telephone or visit those you particularly need.
Over a period of time you will get acquainted with journalists outside London because you will have assignments with them on their own patch or you may drop into see them when visiting the area of business.
Putting a face to your telephone voice or your press releases personalizes you and this helps enormously in the reception your public relations efforts may be given.
Regionals use a lot of material originated by public relations, sometimes in the form in which it was sent.
Many regionals belong to a group of newspapers, such as the Thompson Newspapers Group, and syndicate material.
The role of the regionals is not only to report national and international news if they are a daily, but to reflect what is going on in their area.
Weekly newspapers — the local story
Weeklies are concerned with local news and events.
This is where reports of local horticultural societies, women's institutes, school governors, and local elections are news.
National and international events are covered when they affect the local area.
The staff is small and features such as cookery or fashion are usually from syndicated material or press releases.
This is not to say that the standard of reportage is not high — but quality varies as does layout and printing.
Weeklies will give you loads of cuttings to put before your clients.
However, press relations people often inundate the client with cuttings from places so remote he asks where they are.
Remote too often as well from the readers he needs to reach.
If you persist in this activity, the client will soon cry: "But I want some national coverage" .
Credibility
Paradoxically, the average reader seems to believe his local paper more than a national one.
The national newspaper Is remote, the events not within his area and thus less familiar and less credible.
The weekly covers things he more or less knows about and it seems more often to be of more direct concern to him and his family than an event that happened elsewhere.
This gives an opportunity for your message to gain more attention from the reader and perhaps to make a deeper impression.
Women's publications
In any given week on the average stand of a local newspaper shop there is a choice of dozens of magazines directly aimed at women readers from Cosmopolitan, catering for the fashionable and liberated career woman to Women 5 Weekly for the perhaps more satisfied housewife.
All these magazines cater for  varying interests, and they offer an unexcelled place to tell your public relations story.
The role of women's publications is not only to inform about products, events and issues of interests to both women and men, but to discuss styles of living.
Readers are relatively loyal to their favourite publication.
Readerships are carefully delineated by age, interests, and geographical area so that advertising space may he sold.
This means you can target your PR message to the right audience too.
Often seen at press receptions and "at homes" for a client and his products, journalists from the women's magazines may appear young and rather silly or matronly and gentle.
Don't let this fool you — these journalists  wield a sharp mind and an even sharper pen.
Specialist magazines
Golf Magazine, Motorcycle World, Bike, Amateur Gardening — there are specialist magazines for everyone from the rat fancier to the rugby fan.
Not every one of these may be stocked by every newspaper shop or bookstall in the country but they are available somewhere and are read.
Specialist publications do not exist on articles and news that is exclusive of everything but one subject.
Hence, over a year, issues will carry articles and information which is marginal to the central interest of the publication.
Specialist magazines are frequently overlooked when sending out releases or invitations to press receptions.
On the other hand, banging out a press release and sending it to absolutely everyone is a waste of time.
Often a telephone call to the editor of a specialist publication and then some follow-up, specially written information is far better.
The role of speciality publications is not only to inform, but to build enthusiasm for a particular interest or activity.
House journals
There are over 700 house journals published in this country, and some accept outside contributions.
A marginal but occasionally useful aspect of the media.
Trade and professional publications
These publish news and views of a specific industry, trade or profession, and usually are bought only by those sectors.
Relevant new products, legislation, and competition is their stock in trade.
If your client is in a trade, say baking, then you must deal with his trade journals, Clients are sensitive enough about what is said about them in the consumer press but when negatives appear in their own trade journal, the sparks fly at your next client meeting.
Often clients think they know best and have the trade publication editor to lunch or ring him up with titbits and gossip.
At the same moment you may be trying to tell the same editor an agreed version of what is happening at your client's company.
This overlap happens so frequently that you must be prepared to live with it.
In my experience, clients will not give up their contacts amongst the trade media and they feel at their most confident when talking to someone from a publication in their own trade or profession.
They then show you the coverage they got.
Professional journals support and represent a vested interest and run information about that which affects that interest.
The British Medical Journal reports on the practice of medicine, The Accountant reports on accountancy and so on.
They are open to your public relations efforts but only if the story you have to tell is directly relevant to their readers.
The tone of your information and the authority with which you report it is important.
Readerships can be small and out of all proportion to a journal's wider influence in society.
For example, the British Dental Journal has a small circulation compared with a newspaper, but is often an authoritative source for radio and TV comment.
National radio
Radio is booming and offers excellent potential for the PR operator.
The programmes and needs of each national station are different.
The spoken word is a different skill than the written one and it is unlikely that a press release will be used as it stands.
Radio can be immediate.
It has an urgency and personalization that commands attention.
The secret is the human voice — at once intimate and personal to you — much more magic in a way than the announcer on TV backed by his  hi-tech coloured images flashing across the screen or pictures of the events being described — all of which may actually lessen the feeling of personal involvement.
Learn about radio by listening, study the programmes of each station, learn the format of regular programmes, like Woman's Hour, identify where your story might slot in.
Radio people are keen professionals so find out who makes the decisions and seize opportunities as they arise.
Local radio
Here is your golden media opportunity for local radio is an expanding market place for public relations.
Local radio has been called "the voice of the local community" .
These stations must be constantly fed with information.
They employ few people and their budgets are limited.
Over recent years new specialist services have developed to help public relations to serve local radio.
Information is supplied by the consultancy to companies such as United News Service (UNS).
They, in turn make a tape of an interview or discussion which is then distributed to most local radio stations.
These prepared public relations tapes work wonders and are widely used.
The technique is often to introduce a speaker who represents a product in this way: the local radio announcer says live,"Many housewives today use bleach to disinfect kitchen surfaces and to protect the health of their families.
More and more housewives are using such a product.
We have with us today Mary Slater from the Wonder Bleach Company who will explain what modern housewives see in this old-fashioned but effective product, Mrs Slater…
".
Here the PR tape of Mrs Slater talking is picked up.
This gives the client a mention or two of his product name and, to the listener, it sounds as if it is a live interview at the local radio station.
Clever public relations work, convenient for the station, and, as you guessed, Mrs Slater is really a public relations consultant.
Television
The role of television is to report, analyse, and interpret national and international news and issues and to inform and entertain.
The television industry is very structured and operators carefully monitored.
It is the most powerful medium for mass communication so far devised.
So powerful in fact that  the medium of television itself can be as persuasive as the message it sends.
As far back as the 19505 it was proclaimed that "the medium was the message" .
This complex statement need not be analysed here but just think how often we see a certain politician, good though he may be, declared as "never coming across on the TV" .
The power of the medium may overwhelm a person and his message.
Some people are media stars and the camera loves them.
How film is edited is vital too.
All this makes television an exciting and immense force in society and it is approached with dogged zeal by those ambitious for money and fame.
Outside of a real news event of national importance (and your clients are unlikely ever to have such announcements) you are probably not going to get national TV coverage during most of your working year.
But regional TV coverage is often possible when the story is locally important like a factory opening.
You will love and hate television and always long for success with it.
The first time your little bit of news gets on the Six o'clock News or your client is a member of a panel discussion, you will have arrived professionally.
For a fleeting moment that is.
Again, if you want to understand television then watch it and not just the evening programmes.
Start in the morning and go through the whole day.
Personal disinterest in a programme content will help your objectivity in assessing its potential for your public relations purposes.
Developing your own Media expertise
Read the publications which are your target.
Start with the national newspapers and then your local ones.
You can do that now, your library will have copies.
Ask yourself: What is the difference between their formats?
What are the distinct styles of reporting?
What angles or special interests does each seem to have?
An exercise that is always valuable, is to rewrite a few articles that you have read.
Take one from Women 5 Weekly and rewrite the first three paragraphs for Playboy.
Not easy is it?
Yet, you may well be doing just that when you write one press release for the former magazine and another on the same subject for the latter because both publications are on your public relations media schedule as targets.
Resources: a golden key
The smart operator knows where to go to get information.
If it is in a data or reference book, remember where, but forget the details until you need them.
Have BRAD and other directories up to date and close at hand.
When you learn how to search out and retrieve information you are in possession of a golden key to doing successful public relations.
Why relationships are essential
Building good relationships is essential if you are to put a face on your writing and to your telephone voice.
One way that you will meet members of the media is through press receptions.
Here, you have a chance to circulate and chat informally.
From time to time, taking one to lunch or meeting up for a drink gives you a chance to talk shop and learn about the other's work and publications.
The secret is not just to talk to them when you are trying to sell something.
Start by spending time on developing a relationship of mutual professional regard.
It never hurts to give an extra and helpful bit of information to your friends in the media which may not be connected in any way to your client.
Be interested in what they do and what they are interested in.
Do not spend the whole time talking about yourself, your job and your life.
Good public relations operators are not all mouth; they are also very good ears.
When it comes to television and radio, there are many different people to get to know: programmers, producers, writers, set and property people, make-up — there are a host of them involved in producing just one radio or TV show.
Not all of them, of course, are directly important to your work, but the key figures need to be known and meeting them is sometimes not easy.
There will be functions, conferences, and special occasions where you will meet.
Otherwise, try to visit the studio, learn what material they are looking for, what sort of programmes they may be producing, and to explain what you do and whom you represent.
In a crisis, or when you have hot news, your contacts and relationships in the media world will be invaluable.
They will mark you out as a professional — personable, efficient, and reliable.
Building your portfolio of contacts
I have explained some of the ways of getting to know members of the media and why it is important to have relationships with them within that framework, you must build a portfolio of individual contacts in the media world with whom you liaise, send material and can give special items and ideas from time to time.
This list of contacts is your stock-in-trade.
When you are interviewed for a job which may involve press relations (and most do) your potential employer will often call a few journalists on major publications to see what reaction they have to your name.
To a large extent relationships and contacts with the media appear to be related to information giving and receiving, but there is a deeper and perhaps more significant aspect.
In public relations campaigns, the object is not just to inform but to persuade effectively, or dissuade a part or the whole of the population to or from a particular opinion.
You must convince, persuade, and hopefully guide the media to reflect your client's point of view.
Taking an example of recent years, the abolition of the Greater London Council where advertising and speeches made by both sides of the argument is merely the surface of the public relations work.
While the media will report the pros and cons, it needs to be persuaded that one view is the correct one, since through the media's attitude, people will be influenced as to whether abolition is a good or bad policy.
Presentation of speakers and occasions to present the case are highlights of such work, but around all such events the public relations officer has an hourly job of relating to the media what is happening in the argument and what the various leaders are saying and thinking.
 "Packaging the campaign" is a public relations function and that packaging is usually done first for the media — the powerful ally or potential enemy of your campaign.
Advantages of specialization
There are both advantages and disadvantages in specialising in a particular section of the media.
TV and radio is now almost a speciality, but you could do industrial, trade or scientific media.
Some consultancies and many freelance consultants do specialize in one type of media, say fashion, cars or sports.
On the other hand, there is not much to be said for a speciality in  women's media because the field is too broad and general.
Consumer public relations depends on using to the full this part of the media and it is generally accepted that any consultant working in this field will have contacts within the appropriate media.
To start your career you probably should work with a wide range of media.
"In the future, all public relations consultants may well specialize in one sector of the media.
Broadcasting
Many public relations people have never spoken on radio or appeared before the TV cameras, because the client usually speaks for himself.
All this is changing, there are courses and special training sessions available where both clients and public relations operators can be taught how to perform well on radio and they may get "real experience" at being interviewed by a TV or radio personality.
Clients cannot be everywhere and, indeed, you may be more articulate than the client.
When you broadcast on behalf of a client you represent him and must work within the references and parameters that have been set for you.
In doing a campaign that takes you around the country on tour you may visit the local newspaper, talk to a consumer group, make a speech over a special lunch for local important big-wigs and then do an interview on the local radio.
Shy people rarely make good in public relations.
7 The client
Who are your clients?
The people or groups who may be your clients in public relations are endless.
For consultancies, the two major groups are consumer and industrial — that is companies manufacturing consumer goods and those concerned with industrial products, processes and services.
Your public relations work may be involved with products themselves, the company's image or financial status.
Charities may be clients, whether or not they have their own publicity officer.
Special interest groups, such as professional associations, societies, and commercial associations, including trade unions, frequently call upon the public relations function both inside their own organisations and with outside consultancies.
Public relations is a continuing activity which is sensitive to a changing market-place, public attitudes and national and international events.
Therefore, to some degree any public relations proposal for any potential client is out of date as soon as it is written.
This awareness of the changing world, and the ability of a consultancy to react to it and prepare for it, separates the most professional public relations practitioners from those who merely regard public relations as getting or suppressing publicity.
The client relationship
Building mutual respect
Some clients are wonderful and some are a pain in the neck indecisive, argumentative, and generally difficult.
The very nature of public relations means consultants possess a talent for relating to others and, in general, being warm and sociable.
Therefore, keeping the client happy ought to be easy, but it can be a hard job if you don't make a conscious effort.
The thing to remember is that the client pays your salary and that makes you primarily responsible for the relationship.
When you first meet a client, there is always a honeymoon period when everything seems to go smoothly and the  atmosphere is charged with cheerfulness and hope.
How long it lasts — and it can and ought to last for years — depends on your delivering what your agency promised.
The more you achieve and the better the quality of that achievement, the happier you will keep your client.
There are some ways to help make this happen.
You need to know what the client's own role is in his company.
After understanding this, you need to learn as much as possible about what makes him "tick" ; how does he handle himself in business; what are his job ambitions; is he married and a family man or still single; what are his interests in sports, gardening, sailing and other leisure pursuits; can you define his life style.
Finding out about your client provides opportunities for talking to him in a relaxed and warm manner and for showing that you are interested in him as a person.
It gives you a break from purely business discussions in order to keep the tone of the meeting relaxed and friendly.
In the end, it is a matter of common courtesy to relate to your client as an individual.
The French writer Colette believed that "discipline is everything" and this certainly applies to client meetings.
Discipline means having an agenda, starting and finishing the meeting when you said you would, answering the client's questions with authority (and if you cannot give an answer, say you do not know but you will find out); having your paperwork neat and easily at hand; offering the best hospitality you can provide, such as telephones, a cup of coffee, a comfortable chair and a pad and pencil in case he didn't bring his own.
Don't leave these details to your secretary or "assistant" .
Check that it is done before the client arrives.
It will help keep you relaxed and in control of the meeting.
Finally, see that your meeting achieves the following three objectives no matter what is under discussion: Tell the client: 1 What you have achieved.
2 What you are currently working on.
3 What you will be working on until he sees you next time.
To help him believe you are on top of your work, have ready any relevant financial information about his public relations campaign.
Know how much the budget is and how much you have left to spend.
After all, he has shown enough confidence in you to let you organise this part of his company's expenditure.
Are you reactive  or pro-active?
Re-active public relations is when you respond after a situation has arisen or an event happened.
Your actions are most likely then to be remedial.
There will always be a need for reacting after the event, but many public relations executives depend solely on this kind of activity.
To maintain good credibility with the client, you need to call him before he sees an article in a newspaper that may affect his company — after all you are supposed to be his key person with the best knowledge of the media.
Of course, that does mean keeping up your daily reading of newspapers and magazines and maintaining contact with journalists.
Pro-active public relations is when you are helping to make a situation or event happen and are keeping ahead of things.
One of the best ways to keep pro-active is to feed regularly the client with new information — even rumour and gossip — that show him you are thinking about his company and its commercial interests.
A good public relations executive can often be the first person to tell a client of a new fact about his competitor.
It is a kind of intelligence surveillance exercise.
Your level of awareness will help keep you pro-active.
When the pressure is on to respond to an event after it happens, the client will then judge your professional competence.
Are you a strong fighter for his company position"?
Are you guiding him safely through a crisis with the media?
Imagine that you are the public relations executive for a soap powder company when their new product is suddenly claimed by the newspapers to have caused 300 babies to be sick.
The pressure is enormous and can happen in a matter of minutes in the public relations business.
A pro-active public relations executive would have gone over, in detail, the problem of the new soap powder with the client before it was launched and got approval of an action plan just in case of any problems.
No one can insure against all eventualities and so you strike a balance between the re- and pro-active aspects of your work.
This does much to encourage a client to be confident of your ability and to cement relationships.
Continuous communication
It is all too common to hear a client say,"The agency was terrific — they really seemed to understand our needs.
But after  the first few meetings…well, the people there are nice enough…it's just that we never seem to hear from them between our quarterly meetings".
Such a client is feeling neglected.
His public relations executive is probably working hard enough on his account, but they simply did not keep in touch on a regular basis.
Continuous communications is easy enough to achieve and there are many ways to do it.
In fact, you could say the average public relations executive's world is littered with messages to send the client.
For example, press releases to send for approval; minutes of contact meetings with client or others; a letter about a special meeting with a journalist; a note concerning some new consumer packaging development; a cutting from a regional newspaper that might prove important to the client's new factory siting plans.
Relevant information abounds and the client will be glad to receive it.
From time to time, it is also useful to submit to the client a new idea or a variation in the way you intend to handle some part of his publicity campaign.
This shows creativity and interest on your part.
There is little doubt that a client changes his agency when relationships turn sour.
However, no amount of relationship building will replace hard work and accomplishing what the public relations campaign set out to do.
Persuasion and aggression
Just because a client is the customer doesn't mean he is always right.
Presenting proposals for new projects and for more money is always fraught with pitfalls.
Do not let the client's refusal to agree with you degenerate into an argument.
Good salesmanship depends on a cool mind.
Stick up for what you believe — but with calm and intelligence, and when a client cannot be persuaded, put the matter to one side.
Later he may reconsider your point of view.
In the meantime you will have avoided being aggressive.
What the client pays for your services
The usual system is for the client to say how much he will spend as a working budget during a certain period of time.
This is in addition to his fees which cover your time and talent, the cost of running your part of the consultancy, and the profit.
The  working budget is for expenses you incur in carrying out your programme for the client.
Fees are normally paid monthly or quarterly in advance, while expenses are charged out each month after invoices from suppliers come in to you.
Using outside suppliers
Here are just a few of the outside suppliers you will use in PR work: printers, typographers, car hire firms, script writers, freelance journalists, temporary secretarial services, home economists, film makers, TV and video producers, directors and studios, publishers, product, label and packaging designers, artists, art directors, photographers, radio producers, telephone answering services, entertainers, pop stars, special newspaper insertions, house-to-house delivery services, in-hospital and new mother suppliers, scientists such as bacteriologists, financial experts, economists, airplane and helicopter services, hot air balloonists.
Any service is possible in PR work which is more than half the fun of doing public relations.
In what other job might you call in and use a hot air balloon to appear over a city on a publicity stunt and that same afternoon sit in on a seminar which you have arranged as a scientific event?
It is not only the enormously varied clients and public relations problems which makes your day exciting and different, it is also the number and range of outside specialist services you use.
The quality of achievement
Two national newspaper mentions may be more important to your client than thirty provincial newspapers and magazines.
It is not just the quantity of your achievement during a campaign that counts but the quality.
It is now not uncommon for consultancies to include in their proposals for a campaign how they intend to measure its success.
This establishes at the outset for both parties the criterion for evaluation of work done.
It remains difficult to measure precisely the success of a campaign or event when the purpose of the exercise may not include media targets where clippings and recording serve to show the audience reached.
Even here the quality of that achievement remains more important than sheer numbers.
Where a shift in public opinion is the public relations goal, then sophisticated research needs to be undertaken before and after the exercise to measure achievement.
New business
Public relations consultancies no more want to stand still than any other business enterprise.
For this reason the pursuit of new business is an exciting and exhausting experience that stimulates, tires and sometimes defeats a consultancy.
Exciting because you will join colleagues in a mad rush to write a public relations proposal for the prospective new client and to create a hopefully imaginative and pleasing presentation of these proposals.
Exhausting because there is never enough time it seems between being invited "to pitch" for the new business and actually getting everything ready for the big day.
Stimulating because new ideas, creativity, brain-storming sessions and the prospects of winning make for a great feeling of esprit de corps.
However, you will be tired by all this flurry of activity because you will still be doing regular work and the proposal — writing may take you into late nights and weekend work.
Consultancies all lose clients so they must keep getting new ones.
The key elements in responding well to a brief from a prospective client is to read it thoroughly, think it through, consider what he actually wants, make a proposal which is sound and creative within his expected budget, present these to him in a clear, unconfused way which you have rehearsed, and finally to give him your proposals in a well written form.
All this should speak well for your fluency with language and clarity of intellect.
If this sounds a tall order, it is.
Only a few consultancies come up to this standard.
But in the near future clients will expect it from them all.
8 Creativity in public relations
Over the last thirty years advertising, that most powerful publicity weapon, has discovered how lucrative it can be to add a "new dimension" to the service it offers to clients.
First there was "motivational research" .
Then, in the 1960s, media direction and selection.
In the late 1970s "creativity" was news.
Throughout, research and marketing grew in importance.
Today, advertising agencies push their"full service aspects to prospective clients, or absolute expertise in one area as a small hot shop.
Until recently, public relations seemed not to have recognised the benefits of offering new features in their list of client service "products" .
Consultancies were preoccupied with learning the commercial disciplines of planning and marketing to help qualify public relations as an acceptable modem commercial tool which could help earn profits.
Now, a new aspect has entered the discussions between consultancies and their clients: Creativity.
Clients want it and consultancies say they can provide it.
So rapid has been the development of this dimension of public relations that the Public Relations Consultants Association recently formed a Creative Group to publicise and focus attention on the importance of the creative process in mounting quality campaigns.
But exactly what is this creativity and how do you ensure you are providing it?
The subject of creativity is — argued, included in some agency presentations to new business prospects, and touched upon in education for skills in marketing, advertising and public relations.
The creative springboard starts with a good client brief and then you dive from there into the pool of ideas and solutions which come from sound and considered thinking.
It doesn't matter whether or not this is arrived at through vertical or lateral methods, group exchanges — usually called brainstorming sessions where everyone takes turns to throw in ideas — or insight.
What matters is that the creative solution has a credible and realistic basis.
Here is an example of good creative thinking, drawn from the work of a London consultancy:
CASE History: Better Shoe Ltd
 "FIRST SHOE SCHEME" : A direct support campaign for the trade.
Objectives were two-fold.
First to increase awareness among health visitors on the importance of first shoe correct fit and of Better Shoes Ltd authority.
Second to reach the new mother"when her baby began to walk and her thoughts naturally turned to shoes.
The company needed to reach mothers when the baby was born and again when baby was nine months to reinforce the importance of correct fitting shoes and to push her into a Better Shoe stockist.
Better Shoe Ltd was operating a scheme with a well-known promotion company where the mother, in hospital after delivery, has a bag containing samples and a catalogue of baby products given to her.
It is not a cheap method of reaching new mothers and the scheme is not acceptable in all maternity hospitals or clinics.
Under this scheme mothers had to send to Better Shoe for a poster.
This was sent to them with an information leaflet.
In this way Better Shoe obtained a mailing list which they could use to mail the mothers further information when the child was nine months old.
The promotion achieved almost 10% reply from mothers.
The traditional "closed shop" nature of the medical and allied professions is well known.
It creates the need for a substantially different feasibility testing method than would be found in creating a way of selling branded products to retail customers.
Good public relations practice presents ideas first to medical personnel in an informal but "professional-to-professional" atmosphere.
In this situation professionals are most apt to allow their normal reserve about commerce to lapse, and to give meaningful information.
For Better Shoe Ltd the public relations consultancy selected one area health authority for development and testing.
Meetings were held with the nursing officer and health visitor line management.
The benefits the Better Shoe scheme could bring to parents were discussed, ideas were exchanged and needs discovered.
Clearly this method disposes the health professionals toward feeling that they have helped architect the final programme.
Test material which was adapted from the Better Shoe promotional scheme, incorporated the health visitor's own beliefs.
The next step was to explain the programme to health visitors, giving them the material Better Shoe public relations team wished them to place with the new mother at the time of their first home visit.
Bear in mind that foot health has a very low rating on a "need to know" basis for a mother with a baby only a few weeks old.
Her concerns are nutrition and hygiene dominated.
This is reflected in health visitors"attitudes to foot health.
The public relations scheme
New mothers received a colourful leaflet with a reasonably high brand profile.
Also enclosed was a shoe fitting record card and a paid reply card which the mother could return in order to obtain a wall poster for her baby's room.
The reply card became the basis of a mailing list for the mother when the infant was nine months, ideally the best moment in which to address the Better Shoe brand message to her.
When the reply card was received from the mother, a poster was sent, addressed to her baby, with a personalised covering letter wishing the baby well from the Better Shoe company.
Results
Following the initial distribution by the health visitors of 3,000 sets of leaflets and cards, opinions of those health visitors was researched.
The questionnaire consisted of 39 questions and received a 60% response.
Health visitors responded to the scheme as follows: 74% found the leaflet interesting and valuable.
68% said it was well written and clear.
84% felt it covered all aspects associated with the subject matter.
75% stated they would recommend it to be available from general practitioners surgeries.
63% said mothers found the leaflet interesting and valuable.
87% of all mothers found the Better Shoe fit card useful and said they were likely to keep it.
94% felt mothers would be more aware of the need for correctly shoes for their child.
This assessment by the health visitors showed a dramatic increase in their own awareness of infant foot health and the acceptability of introducing information earlier to new mothers.
The final test was the response rate from mothers in requesting a wall poster.
Whereas the original promotional scheme used by Better Shoe Ltd cost eight times more money and reached at its best a response rate of 11%, the public relations scheme using health visitors and tailored to an understanding of mothers"needs, achieved a response rate of 17.3% on the first test and 21% on the second test — a significant accomplishment.
Research in public relations
Sound public relations demands you know why you are taking a particular course of action.
The best way to arrive at that intelligence is through research.
This helps you to know as much as possible about the targets you are trying to reach.
There are four main kinds of research that you will want to use: motivational research, opinion surveys, group discussions, panel research.
Expert skill is involved in motivational research because this is investigation into the psychology of why individuals behave as they do.
It measures and quantifies how they act within a particular pattern of living.
Most people have experienced directly or through reading about it the business of opinion research.
Television is full of it about election time.
The preparation of research questions, the sampling itself and the analysis of the results calls once again for experts.
Some research companies like Nielsen and Attwood do continuous research for marketing departments which subscribe to their reports on a monthly or annual basis.
Most public relations consultancies do not subscribe to these but depend on getting the information from the client.
The panel technique is where a number of people are asked to serve on a panel and to give their views on questions put to them.
Often such a panel gives early warning of changes in public opinion where they are consulted over several years.
Research is a sophisticated modern service and it is used increasingly by public relations consultancies to help them define and create a public relations programme.
There is still a creative role in developing campaigns but it comes after a firm foundation of fact has been established.
Hopefully in the future it will become standard public relations practice to use research to measure the results or achievements of campaigns.
The communications audit
This is an approach taken up by consultancies in the early 1980s to tackle a client's problems where corporate work is involved or the company image situation, manufacturing base, or product range is complex.
The communications audit provides a way for the consultancy to examine the matter, to assess all aspects, and to talk to people within and without the company, before arriving at a point where a PR programme can be created and recommendations made.
New technology in public relations
It is hard to believe that any business whose life blood is communications could lag behind in using modern information technology, but that is how it is with British public relations.
Consultancies have been slow to invest in the available new technology for the efficient detailing of their everyday work.
You are unlikely to find a word processor on your desk or fully computerised accounts, research and marketing departments.
You may find you are expected to use a portable typewriter.
Copiers have been a real blessing, but they are more likely to be small models, not those that print, collate, fold and insert.
The profits have been in public relations for a long time but too often those in charge have refused to invest some measure of it in capital equipment that would improve client services and the daily life of their workers.
At the heart of any work in modern communications must be the use of the best and quickest communication systems.
For a career in public relations in the future, experience with word processors, computers, and an understanding of information networks, which many large manufacturing companies now have on a world wide basis, will be mandatory.
FRIENDS of FOOTBALL
The Football Association aims to stop hooliganism and win back a good public image.
This strong logo identifies a major PR campaign to help make all who love football support the game in a friendly way.
9 How to get started
If you want to be successful in public relations you must be literate, articulate and numerate and have a flair with words.
You will not only write for the public but will also produce many reports of meetings, research, and projects during your career.
A continuing feature of your work will be leaflets, brochures, labels, press handouts, packs, information sheets, posters, special articles, features and advertisements.
It is better to have too much information rather than too little in a democratic, consumerist society.
But the information you produce should be honest, as factual as possible, and serve some useful purpose besides just puffing up your client's ego.
When you look at the dazzling display of art work and fine printing done in so much consumer literature today, you will get some idea of the high standards required in public relations.
In addition to publications, there are written words for films, video tapes, sound recordings, and for information used in broadcasting.
Even if you work in a large consultancy of the future where a media department controls the production, you will still probably have to write.
Courses and examinations
The Communication Advertising and Marketing Education Foundation (CAM) is an examining body and examination system for both a certificate and a diploma in communications.
There are CAM guided studies and colleges through which these may be obtained.
The certificate is also available by correspondence study.
Write to CAM at Abford House, 15 Wilton Road, London SW I for a list of colleges offering courses.
CAM has regional co-ordination officers in Aberdeen, Leeds, Birmingham, Liverpool, Bristol, Manchester, Newcastle, Edinburgh, Glasgow and Northern Ireland whose aims are to:
encourage local educational establishments to run CAM courses;
liaise with employers and potential students to ensure that more people enter for courses and take the CAM examinations;
help students in every way possible, eg by advising on guided studies.
An example of what you might study in obtaining a CAM diploma in PR for Commercial Organizations:
Corporate Identity and awareness
Definition of corporate identity, culture, positioning and reputation; influencing factors.
— Identification of public and measurement of opinions, attitudes and motives.
Formulating a corporate identity programme.
The projection of a corporate identity.
The integration of all aspects of PR activity to achieve this end and to:
enhance long term awareness among its key public of a company's aims and achievements
foster favourable attitudes and minimise unfavourable actions due to lack of information.
Government relations
Understanding the legislative processes in Westminster and Whitehall, the role of parliament including government and opposition parties and the system by which laws are made; appreciating the responsibilities of the EEC Commission, the European Parliament and the administrative bodies; responsibility for the development of EEC directives and transnational law.
Establishing and maintaining relationships with relevant individuals and officials within these organisations.
Monitoring the development of legislation and undertaking the presentation of the case relevant to proposed parliamentary actions that affect the business activity.
The role of trade associations, professional bodies, business organisations and pressure groups in parliamentary relations.
Local Communities
The importance of the local populace, and especially key sub-groups, being kept aware of the company's attitudes and policies.
Local communities as employees, customers, neighbours — past and present
Involvement in local activities, on a personal and corporate level, as an aspect of corporate PR.
While CAM examination questions are changed every year, here are some from a recent paper:
QUESTION
You are the public Affairs Director of a charity, which deals with the adoption and fostering of children.
Your charity is having problems finding homes, particularly for black and handicapped children.
Give details of a PR programme that might be run to address the problem.
QUESTION
At a launch of a new diagnostic technique the Chief Executive of a hi-tech company in the medical field seeks your advice on two public relations programmes: I Aimed at his own company's staff: 230 of them at two factories 65 miles apart and at an R and D facility with 38 senior staff.
2 Selected senior and middle management and staff of their parent company who will be needed to manufacture vital components for the new equipment and also to support efforts to raise new finance for further research and development.
As he is a very busy person he begs for your report to be in note form listing the public to be reached and the media you select.
QUESTION
You are the Public Relations Manager for a bus company which runs continental tours from Britain to destinations in Europe.
In the past few months your vehicles have been involved in a number of accidents and one person has been killed.
It has been alleged that the accidents have  occurred because your drivers have been working over the legal limit and that your vehicles have not been serviced.
(a) How would you counter these allegations?(b) How would you attract the tourists back to your bus holidays?
Once you work in PR there are opportunities for further learning either in connection with colleges and polytechnics, and Universities or through the Institute of Public Relations.
Ashridge Management College offers a CAM Certificate for graduates.
The Cranfield School of Management offers an Executive Master of Business Administration programme with extended study of public relations for those already possessing a good university degree and several years of business experience.
Employment agencies
Magazines such as Campaign and PR Week and the Creative and Media Appointments section of The Guardian newspaper are where you will find the names of agencies who specialize in the advertising and PR field.
Alternative routes and on-the-job opportunities to learn and get promoted
The number of women working in consumer public relations who started as secretaries is legion, but in itself secretarial work is not a qualification for public relations.
However, if you go to work as a secretary in a consultancy this can often lead to assisting an executive.
You might do some press releases, information gathering, help at press receptions when extra hands are needed, prepare information kits and sit in with your boss at client and supplier meetings.
In this way an ambitious secretary gradually becomes an assistant.
Once that status is recognized, she is on her way to a public relations career.
Men could equally well try this career route but few seem to take secretarial courses.
Many consultancies welcome work experience in a field unrelated to public relations.
Working in a manufacturing company, or as a solicitor or chartered accountant gives invaluable experience.
One of the best places to get experience before going into public relations is in the marketing department of a company.
If you are interested in financial public relations then you almost certainly need either a degree or to have already qualified in a discipline such as law or accountancy.
You may be expected as well to have already worked for some time in a related financial area, such as stock broking.
Public relations agencies do employ a number of assistants and a bright young person can sometimes get employed in this  category.
On-the-job training automatically takes place as you work, and some consultancies have established training programmes but these are rare among British operations.
As an assistant you will probably gather information, draft press releases, make up media invitation lists, search out information, set up meetings with outside specialists and consultants, deliver information to the media (here is a chance to chat and get to know some faces in the media world).
You will no doubt share your boss's late night work and the rush and panic of the daily grind in public relations.
You may not get to attend client meetings, but this depends on whether you were employed as an experienced but young professional or are a new entrant who is just beginning.
How much can you earn?
A glance at PR Week or Campaign magazines or the Creative Appointments section which appears each week in The Guardian will give you an idea of current earnings for qualified public relations staff.
Specialists such as those in public and corporate affairs or financial public relations can expect even higher salaries.
When you first start, your salary may be in the range of £6000 to £8000.
Salaries of £14,000 and £25, 000 are usual for experienced executives.
Top performers earn from £35, 000 upwards.
Perks such as company cars and allowances for newspapers and TV are common.
Getting some early experience now
One of the best starts for later work in public relations, and one which can sometimes prove a route into a job, is working for a charity, organization or event which needs publicity.
It may be local and would welcome you.
Often in such cases publicity is done by the person who seems keenest and most likely to succeed.
That often means a young person.
At school or college you can volunteer to do publicity for the school play, or your local community charity drive.
Local theatre productions also call for you to see the press, write and mail out press releases and invitations to first nights.
Editing or writing for your school or college magazine is also valuable.
Probably the most important early work experience you can have is to have sold something.
Even if you don't go into consumer public relations which has an immediate relationship  to selling, you will get to know the public as a consumer, get to understand how business is done, what product selling points are all about, and finally, learn how to sell yourself.
IBM, the fifth biggest company in the world, many years ago formalised the basis of their selling success: establish the need, show the features of what you are selling, and then talk about the benefits.
The formula of "need, feature, benefit" really works and is worth trying.
Later, when you are working in public relations, you will be "selling" the media on ideas and persuading the public or key opinion formers.
The better a salesman you are the more likely you are to succeed.
Professional associations in public relations
As well as the Public Relations Society of America, there is the International Public Relations Association and, in Britain, the Institute of Public Relations (IPR) established in 1948.
All these have published codes of practice for their members.
The IPR is involved in CAM and other educational courses in public relations.
The IPR's main objectives are:(a) to promote the development of public relations for the benefit of the practice in commerce; industry, central and local government; nationalized undertakings; professional, trade, and voluntary organizations and for the benefit of all practitioners, and others concerned in or with public relations;(b) to encourage and foster the observance of high professional standards by its members and to establish and prescribe such standards;(c) to arrange meetings, discussions, conferences, etc, on matters of common interest, and generally to act as a clearing house for the exchange of ideas on the practice of public relations.
Unlike the IPR which has individual members, the Public Relations Consultants Association was formed in 1969 as a trade organization with the objective of promoting the growth of business of its members and that of public relations consultancy practices.
Tomorrow in advertising and public relations
Advertising may well continue in much the same form as in the past and, therefore, careers in this field will remain more or less  the same.
This is not likely to be the case for public relations, which is apt to become more specialised with increasing requirements for new entrants to have a high educational level, disciplined minds, and an ability to use advanced information technology.
Along with this will be a call on the public relations function to advise and to operate increasingly sophisticated persuasion techniques within the framework of democracy.
As commerce and vested-interest groups come to understand the power and potential of public relations, so they will want to use it more.
Consultancies may not enjoy the same growth as in-house public relations departments for this reason.
Already new areas of expertise in public relations are emerging such as Crisis Management".
Here consultancies set out to help a client who is in an emergency situation.
For example, if his company has  unwelcome suitors who want to take over, or his activities in the Third World are threatening home sales.
In the future, job opportunities for public relations professionals will increase.
Those who now equip themselves with good educational qualifications, training in modern management techniques, write and speak fluently and are comfortable with modern technology, will find satisfying and rewarding careers in either public relations or advertising.
You might be one of those people.