

THE NATURE OF THE CONSTITUTION
Most countries have a written document known as "the constitution" which lays down the main rules governing the structure and functions of government and which regulates the relationship between the state and its citizens.
Typically such constitutions are to some degree entrenched, that is, the constitutional rules are more difficult to change than ordinary laws, perhaps requiring approval by referendum (Eire) or special majority (West Germany).
Such constitutions also tend to have a higher status than ordinary laws thus creating the need for a supreme body such as a supreme court with the power to declare laws passed in contravention of the constitution, invalid.
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION
Unwritten
In Britain we do not have a written constitution in the sense of a formal document but that does not mean that we lack constitutional rules.
These are expressed with differing degrees of formality in the form of statutory provisions, case law and conventions of the constitution.
There are, compared to many countries, few positive statements regarding the powers and duties of the organs of government.
These are simply recognised by common law and convention and are subject to various legal and conventional limitations.
Our constitution does not contain any positive declaration of the rights of individuals in the form of a Bill of Rights.
Those rules relating to such matters as freedom of speech and assembly derive from, and have the same status as, any other rule of law.
Flexible
The British Constitution can be described as flexible in that:(a) It does not have the rigidity of most written constitutions as Parliament can repeal any law by a simple majority.
The orthodox viewpoint is that, as each successive Parliament has the power to pass or repeal any legislation, any attempt to bind Parliament by entrenching a statutory provision, would be ineffective.
(Ellen Street Estates Ltd. v. Minister of Health (C.A., 1936)).
It has, however, been argued that certain fundamental Acts of Parliament such as the  Act of Union with Scotland 1707 and the European Communities Act 1972 could not be repealed as, in each case, Parliament which enacted the provision is no longer in existence in the same form but has reconstituted itself as a less powerful body.
Nevertheless, while in legal theory there may be complete flexibility, the political reality may be quite different.
The Statute of Westminster 1931, the various Independence Acts may, in theory, be capable of repeal, but in practice they are entrenched in our constitution.
"Freedom once given cannot be taken away.
Legal theory must give way to practical politics."
(Per Lord Denning in Blackburn v. The Att. -Gen.
(C.A., 1971)).
(b) The absence of a written constitution has allowed quite considerable changes to be made informally, without amendment of these legal rules which do exist.
For example, the gradual transfer of power from the House of Commons to the Cabinet has occurred without any formal legislative change.
Conventions, an important source of constitutional law can be extremely flexible, reflecting changes in the political situation as and when they occur.
Thus the constitution can evolve gradually.
Unitary
Because all legislative power stems from Parliament, we have a unitary as opposed to a federal constitution.
It is certainly possible for Parliament to give limited powers of government to local authorities and to local and national assemblies but the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty means that a subsequent Parliament can repeal the relevant legislation and take back the power.
For example this happened in 1972 when the Westminster Parliament reimposed direct rule in Northern Ireland.
SOURCES OF THE CONSTITUTION
Legislation
Although we do not have a written constitution there are many Acts of Parliament relevant to constitutional laws.
Some fundamental steps in the constitutional development of the country were the Bill of Rights 1689 which limited the power of the monarch to rule by virtue of the royal prerogative and the Act of Settlement 1700 which further strengthened the power of Parliament and provided for the succession to the English throne.
The composition of Parliament has been altered by the Peerage Act 1963 and its powers by the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949.
Case law
According to Dicey, writing in the nineteenth century, the British Constitution was "judge made." 
Even today there are many areas of constitutional law regulated not by statute but by the common law as expounded by our judges.
Examples of this can be seen in the development of the doctrine of the supremacy of Parliament and in judicial review, for example, the rules of natural justice.
In recent years there has been an increased reliance on statute law, for example, in relation to public order and the powers of the police, but, of course , here too, the judges have a role to play in the interpretation of the statutory provisions.
Conventions of the Constitution
If one tries to understand the British Constitution simply by reference to case law and statute, one obtains a totally false impression.
Take one example, the role played by the monarch.
The Queen must give the royal assent to all legislation.
She appoints the Prime Minister and has the power to dissolve Parliament.
This might lead one to believe that the monarch still exercises considerable political power.
Yet in practice we now have a constitutional monarchy where the Queen acts on the advice of her Prime Minister.
The royal assent has not been refused since 1708.
No monarch has refused to dissolve Parliament in modern times and the Queen has, in recent years, been relieved of any real responsibility as to the choice of Prime Minister as the various political parties have now clearly defined rules for the election of a leader.
Such changes in the power of the monarch have arisen, not through statute, but as a result of the convention that the monarch should not become politically involved and should not be seen to favour any one political party.
This example illustrates the fact that the formal rules have to be understood against a background of constitutional conventions which can both expand and modify the strict legal rules.
And so conventions have been described as "the flesh which clothes the dry bones of the law." 
What are conventions?
(a) Conventions are non-legal rules of constitutional behaviour which are considered to be binding upon those who operate the constitution but which are not enforced by the courts or by the presiding officers in Parliament.
They may be recognised by the courts as part of the constitutional background against which a particular decision is taken (Carltona v. Commissioner of Works  (C.A., 1943)), but will not be enforced directly.
(See also Reference Re Amendment of the Constitution of Canada (Supreme Court of Canada 1982).
(b) They are not written down in any formal sense in that they are not expressed as Acts of Parliament nor are they established by judicial precedent.
Occasionally an existing convention is formalised as, for example, section 4 of the Statute of Westminster 1931.
(c) Important constitutional institutions such as the Cabinet and the office of Prime Minister have been created by convention.
The first statutory reference to the Prime Minister came in the Chequers Estate Act 1917.
The relationship between Government and Parliament can only be understood against the background of the convention of ministerial responsibility.
They thus have a central role in the development of the British constitution.
How are they established?
Constitutional law has always recognised the need for a close relationship between political and legal power.
Conventions have been introduced at every stage of our constitutional development in an attempt to regulate or define the use of that power.
It is not always easy to describe conventions and to determine their force and strength.
Even conventions that are well established in principle such as those relating to cabinet collective responsibility may be vague in their application.
The sources of a convention are open-ended and diverse.
There are no formal rules of recognition, no formal rules of change.
(See Colin Munro 91 L.Q.R. 218).
John Mackintosh has described a convention as "a generally accepted political practice," arguing that it was necessary to deduce its nature and scope by observing and analysing the conduct of government and politics in similar situations over the years.
That is not to say that antiquity is a valid criterion for the establishment of a convention.
New conventions arise, conventions alter in the light of changing circumstances.
He would therefore argue that conventions are established by their acceptance by those who participate in the political arena.
Why are they observed?
(a) Some writers have stressed the similarity between conventions and legal rules arguing that breach of a convention will ultimately lead to the imposition of a sanction.
It is pointed out, for example, that if a government, having lost the confidence of the House, attempted to continue in power in breach of that convention, it would  ultimately be forced to act illegally as Parliament would not grant it supply.
But this is not the imposition of a direct legal sanction.
At most, the sanction will be political.
So, for example, breaches of the convention of cabinet collective responsibility have tended to weaken the government and damage the political career of the minister responsible for the breach.
(b) Others have argued that obedience is based on the consent or acquiescence of all those involved in the political process but this assumes a degree of shared interest and common standards which are difficult to perceive today.
(c) It must be remembered that conventions have differing degrees of force and ultimately that force may be dependent on the extent to which the convention is perceived as being politically necessary at any given time and the extent to which it can be seen to reflect current political values.
Advantages of conventions
(a) Flexibility.
Conventions add flexibility to our constitutional rules.
For example the convention of cabinet collective responsibility was suspended to take into account the particular circumstances of the campaign prior to the referendum on continuing British membership of the EEC.
(b) Avoid the"need for formal constitutional change.
They are a means of keeping the constitution in tune with changing political circumstances without recourse to legislation.
This facilitates the smooth running of government and must be advantageous to those in government as it minimises the need to effect formal changes, a task which is time-consuming and may be beset with difficulties.
Disadvantage
Flexibility can also be a disadvantage.
It has been argued that the ultimate object of most conventions is that the rules of government should accord with the wishes of the majority.
That majority may not have the political power to ensure this.
Instead it is the government of the day which is able to take advantage of the flexibility of the system to impose its definition of a convention at any particular time.
Other sources
The law and custom of Parliament
Parliament has the right to regulate its own procedure and does so by means of standing orders.
These, together with resolutions passed by either House and the rulings given by the Speaker, are contained in Erskine May's Parliamentary Practice.
Treaties, Conventions and other international obligations
These are not a direct source of constitutional law in the sense that they do not normally involve any change in domestic law (see, however The Parlement Belge (H.C., 1879)).
A treaty may bind the government in international law but will normally be given effect within this country by the passing of legislation.
This happened in the case of membership of the EEC where the signing of the various treaties was followed by the passing of the European Communities Act 1972.
Similarly international conventions such as the International Convention for the Protection of Human Rights 1950, ratified by Great Britain in 1953, do not give directly enforceable rights to individuals in this country before the British courts.
The courts will, however, have some regard for such conventions presuming that Parliament intended to comply with its moral obligations and bring our law into line with the convention.
Thus for example where there is any ambiguity in domestic law the courts have said that they will resolve that ambiguity in such a way as to give effect to our international obligations.
(See Scarman L.J.
in Ahmad v. I.L.E.A. (C.A., 1978)).
THE SUPREMACY OF PARLIAMENT
An important characteristic of our constitution is that Parliament and not the constitution, is the supreme legal authority.
While, in the majority of states, the legislature is limited by the constitution in what it can or cannot do, the traditional view here is that Parliament is subject to no such legal limitation and that our courts have no power to declare laws duly passed by Parliament invalid.
According to Blackstone "What Parliament doth, no power on earth can undo." 
 "In theory," said Dicey,"Parliament has total power.
It is sovereign."
Dicey's view of Parliamentary supremacy
(a) Parliament was competent to pass laws on any subject.
(b) Its laws could regulate the activities of anyone, anywhere.
(c) Parliament could not bind its successors as to the content, manner and form of subsequent legislation.
(d) Laws passed by Parliament could not be challenged by the courts.
The legal limitations on the scope of Parliament's power
Dicey argued that there was no legal limitation on the scope of Parliament's power.
Indeed Parliament has legislated on matters affecting every aspect of our lives.
It has legislated to change fundamental constitutional principles.
It has lengthened and shortened its own life.
Nor has it felt bound by territorial or jurisdictional limits.
Parliament has legislated regarding aliens, even with regard to their activities outside British territory (The Hijacking Act 1967).
Sir Ivor Jennings once said "If Parliament enacts that smoking in the streets of Paris is an offence then, in the eyes of the English Courts, it is an offence." 
There may be practical difficulties in enforcing such a law but that would not make it invalid.
Political considerations may make it unlikely, even inconceivable that Parliament might legislate in a particular manner.
Can one imagine a situation where Parliament passed legislation regulating the internal affairs of the United States of America?
This led Professor H.W.R. Wade to argue that it was nonsensical to have a legal theory which said that Parliament could pass laws on any subject without restriction.
Certainly there are many internal and external political limitations on Parliament's freedom of action.
It has been argued that British membership of the EEC imposes a legal not simply a political limitation on Parliament.
The 1967 White Paper (Cmnd. 3301) on the Legal and Constitutional Implications of Membership of the EEC, stated that Parliament's freedom of action would be limited in that it would have to refrain from passing legislation inconsistent with community law and would be under an obligation in certain instances to legislate to give effect to our community obligations.
The European Communities Act 1972, s.2(1) gives present and future community law legal force in the United Kingdom but the Act does not specifically prohibit Parliament from enacting conflicting legislation.
It would seem that Parliament's legal power has been limited only if:(a) community law is seen as a higher system of law; and (b) our courts are willing to uphold the supremacy of community law.
Is community law supreme?
In the view of the European Court, the courts of the member states should give supremacy to community law (Costa v. E.N.E.L.  1964).
The 1967 White Paper at paragraph 23, states the government's intention to be that "community law takes precedence over the domestic law of the member states." 
Section 2(4) of the Act provides…any enactment passed or to be passed, other than one contained in this Part of this Act, shall be construed and have effect subject to the foregoing provisions of this section…"
This refers back to section 2(1) which incorporates community law into our system.
Section 2(4) could therefore be said to give supremacy to community law.
But it can also be held to mean no more than it creates a presumption that, if there is a conflict between community and domestic law, any ambiguity in that domestic law will be resolved to give effect to our community obligations.
Our courts have not yet been forced to give a direct ruling on this matter.
Lord Denning, in an obiter statement made prior to the passing of the 1972 Act, suggested that if we joined the community our sovereignty "would henceforth be limited…it would not be ours alone but would be shared with others." 
In Macarthys Ltd. v. Smith (C.A., 1979), however, he indicated that Parliament retained the power to pass legislation inconsistent with the Treaty of Rome and our obligations under community law, indicating that if this was done intentionally, our courts would have no alternative but to uphold the supremacy of our own domestic law.
There is therefore no direct example of the British courts imposing restrictions on Parliament's freedom of legislative action.
The various devices used by the courts to maintain the present position will be discussed below.
The power of Parliament to hind its successors
The traditional view is that Parliament has no power to bind its successors either as to the manner or as to the form of subsequent legislation.
As each successive Parliament is deemed to be all powerful, logically, that Parliament must have the power to make or unmake any law.
Accordingly it would seem to be impossible to entrench a provision in our constitution.
It was said in Godden v. Hales (1686) that Parliament was entitled to ignore any provision in an earlier Act purporting to prevent the Act being repealed in the normal way, that is either expressly or by implication.
This was followed in the case of Ellen Street Estates Ltd. v. The Minister of Health (C.A., 1934) where the court found that it was impossible for Parliament to enact that, in a subsequent statute dealing with the same subject-matter, there should be no implied repeal.
 "The one thing Parliament cannot do is to bind its successors" (Maughan L.J.).
Various arguments have been put forward to suggest that specific statutory provisions have been entrenched.
The Statute of Westminster: Independence Acts
It has been argued that these have been entrenched as, in terms of the political realities of the situation, it is inconceivable that Parliament would repeal them.
(Lord Denning M.R. in Blackburn v. The Att. -Gen.
(C.A., 1971)).
That is not to say that if, in the future, Parliament did repeal an independence Act and passed legislation purporting to regulate the internal affairs of the country, the British courts would reject such legislation.
In Madzimbamuto v. Lardner Burke (P.C., 1969) Lord Reid said that even if Parliament acted improperly or unwisely, it was not open to the courts to say that it had acted illegally and that the resultant legislation was invalid.
The court advised that a detention order made under the authority of an Emergency Powers Act passed by the illegal regime in Rhodesia was invalid as its authority to legislate had been taken away.
It did not allow the political reality of the situation to affect its conclusion knowing full well that the detention order would continue to be upheld within Rhodesia.
In practical terms it was impossible to provide a remedy for the detained Madzimbamuto.
The case did, of course, involve a limited grant of independence.
Rhodesia was not a sovereign state.
Where such a sovereign state has been created by a grant of independence, the courts may be more reluctant to take back power in that they would have to recognise the political fact that the state in question is a foreign country and no longer part of the legal order of this country.
Yet within our legal system, Parliament appears to have the legal power to repeal any law, even to act contrary to the principles of international law.
The courts would simply uphold the latest intention of Parliament.
(See Lord Sankey L.C. in British Coal Corp. v. The King (H.L., 1935) and Sir Robert Megarry V.-C. in Manuel v. Attorney General (H.C.
1983)).
The European Communities Act 1972
Several grounds have been suggested for holding that this Act cannot be repealed.
(a) That by joining the European Economic Community, a new order has been created.
Within that new order Parliament is no longer all powerful and cannot amend or repeal any statute by which that order was established.
The European Communities Act, it is argued, is such a constituent statute, and is accordingly entrenched.
(A similar argument has been used with regard to the Act of Union between Scotland and England in 1707).
(b) That by assigning rights and powers to the community in accordance with the Treaty provisions member states have limited their sovereign rights in such a way as to make it impossible to withdraw unilaterally.
(Art Treasurers Case E.C., 1972).
There is no evidence to suggest that the British courts would accept this view.
(c) That, ultimately, the validity of legislation depends on the rules of recognition employed by our judges.
The present norm of validity recognises the latest statutory intention of Parliament.
It has been suggested that this norm has altered and that the courts will recognise as valid only legislation which has been passed by both houses and given the royal assent, has not been repealed expressly or by implication and which accords with our obligations under community law.
(It has been suggested that one method by which a written constitution could be entrenched could be by "manufacturing" such a change in the norm of validity by altering the terms of the judicial oath so that judges would swear to uphold only laws which were in conformity with the constitutional provisions — per H. W. R. Wade, 1989 Hamlyn Lecture: Constitutional Fundamentals).
Laws passed by Parliament cannot be challenged in the courts
Our courts have refused to consider the validity of an Act of Parliament either on the ground that Parliament had no power to pass it or on the ground that the statute had been improperly passed.
Substantive validity
Until the seventeenth century the courts would declare Acts of Parliament void if they considered them contrary to natural law, repugnant to the law or impossible to be performed.
In modern times any such challenge has been totally unsuccessful.
In R. v. Jordan (1967) Jordan, who had been sentenced for offences under the Race Relations Act 1965, applied for a writ of habeas corpus claiming that he had been convicted under an invalid law.
He alleged that the statute in question was invalid in that it conflicted with a fundamental principle of natural law, the right of free speech.
He claimed that no Act of Parliament could take away this right.
This was rejected by the court which simply stated that it had no power to consider the validity of an Act of Parliament.
This view was endorsed by the House of Lords in British Rail Board v. Pickin (H.L., 1974) and followed in Martin v. O'Sullivan (C.A. 1982).
Procedural irregularity
Acts of Parliament have also been challenged on the ground that they have been improperly passed.
In 1842 a Private Act of Parliament was challenged on this ground (Edinburgh & Dalkeith Railway v. Wauchope (H. L., 1842)).
Lord Campbell, upholding the validity of the Act, refused to investigate the internal workings of Parliament saying that if the Act appeared valid on its face, then it must be accepted by the courts.
If, from the Parliamentary Roll it appeared that the bill had passed through both Houses and received the Royal Assent, the courts could not inquire into what happened during its parliamentary stages.
That is a question for Parliament.
A number of writers have sought to distinguish such a procedural challenge from the substantive challenge in cases such as Jordan arguing that it does not seek to limit Parliament's area of power.
It can be argued that there is a clear difference between finding that Parliament has failed to follow its own procedural rules and from saying that Parliament does not have the power to legislate in a particular way.
R. F. V. Heuston summarises this by saying that there is a distinction between the rules which govern on the one hand the composition and the procedure and, on the other hand, the area of power, of a sovereign legislature.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council appeared to give some support to this distinction.
In Att. -Gen. for New South Wales v. Trethowan (P.C., 1932) a decision of the Australian Supreme Court to grant a declaration that two Bills passed by the New South Wales State Legislature were invalid and grant an injunction restraining the Bills from being presented to the Governor for assent was upheld.
The Privy Council found that the State Legislature was bound by section 5 of the Colonial Laws Validity Act 1865 which required any constitutional amendment to be in the manner and form required by the legislation in force at the time.
The two Bills in question were not in the manner and form required as under earlier State legislation any constitutional change had to be approved by a referendum.
In R. (O'Brien) v. Military Governor, N.D. U. Internment Camp (1924) a decision of the old Irish Court of Appeal, a Public Safety (Emergency Powers) Act was declared invalid on the ground that it had not been passed in accordance with the procedure laid down in the constitution.
Nor has this approach been confined to legislation passed by subordinate legislatures.
See, for example, the South African case of Harris v. Minister of the Interior (1952).
The question then is whether it can apply to countries where the procedural rules are not contained in any constitutional document or higher form of law.
R. F. V.  Heuston has argued that it should, saying that it cannot make any difference whether the rules which identify the procedure come from common law, statute or a combination of both.
The decision of the House of Lords in British Rail Board v. Pickin (1974) appears to be a rejection of this line of argument.
Their Lordships refused to look at the internal workings of Parliament stating that if errors had occurred in the procedure for passing legislation then it was for Parliament alone to correct them.
Lord Morris said that just as it was for Parliament to lay down the procedures to be followed for the passing of legislation, so it was for Parliament to determine whether these procedures had been followed.
The House of Lords was clearly reluctant to clash with Parliament on a matter within the scope of Parliamentary Privilege (see Chap.
3).
Indeed Lord Reid seemed unwilling to draw any distinction between challenges on procedural or substantive grounds.
In his view, the courts had no power to question the validity of any act passed by both Houses of Parliament and given the Royal Assent.
This has been followed in Martin v. O'Sullivan (C.A. 1982) where the Social Security Act 1975 was challenged on the ground that Members of Parliament who enacted it were disqualified.
The court refused to investigate the validity of the Act saying that it was unable to look beyond the parliamentary roll of statutes.
Conflict with community law
Any willingness on the part of our courts to accord supremacy to community law is thus limited by two factors:(a) an unwillingness to hold that Parliament has limited its power to pass legislation conflicting with existing obligations under community law;(b) lack of precedent for challenges to the validity of an Act of Parliament.
(See R. v. Secretary of State for Transport, ex p.
Factortame (H.L., 1989).
To date the courts have managed to avoid any head-on clash between community and domestic law:(a) by finding some ambiguity in the domestic statute and resolving that ambiguity in such a way a- to give effect to our community obligations;
(b) by finding that a domestic statute passed prior to entry is repealed by implication by the European Communities Act 1972 in so far as it fails to accord with our community obligations and thus does not represent the latest intention of Parliament;
(c) by arguing that any subsequent inconsistent legislation was inadvertent, that the Westminster Parliament could not have intended to legislate in a manner conflicting with community obligations and that the "bounden duty of the courts would then be to give effect to community law" Macarthys v. Smith (C.A., 1979).
(d) by finding that the conflicting community directive had no effect between individuals (Duke v. G.E.
C. Reliance Ltd.
(H.L. 1988).
THE EXECUTIVE
THE POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE STATE
The state has three types of function: legislative, judicial and executive.
The legislative function is exercised mainly through Parliament which has the power to make laws of general applicability and to grant to other bodies the power to make delegated legislation under authority of an act of parliament.
Originally the monarch had the power to make laws by means of royal proclamation.
A residue of this is the power to make orders in council.
The state also has authority to determine disputes which arise out of the operation of its laws.
Such disputes are allocated to courts, tribunals or even to government ministers, who, increasingly, exercise functions of a judicial nature.
No clear principles determine the allocation of disputes to these bodies although the greater the element of discretion and the more important the policy considerations, the less likely it is for the courts to take on the new area of responsibility.
The state has various executive functions.
It must initiate, formulate and direct general policy.
That policy must then be put into operation, monitored and regulated.
Responsibility for this is with the government of the country, the main decisions being taken by the Cabinet and put into effect by the various government departments and a range of quasi-autonomous bodies.
The doctrine of separation of powers
In the eighteenth century, Montesquieu argued that there were three entirely separate functions of government: legislative, executive  and judicial, and that these three functions should be exercised by entirely separate organs, Parliament, the Executive and the Courts.
There should, he argued, be no overlap of personnel or function.
Otherwise too much power would be concentrated in the hands of one organ and this would lead to tyranny.
Quite clearly there is no strict separation of powers in this country today.
There are overlaps of personnel.
The Prime Minister and the Cabinet are drawn from Parliament.
The Lord Chancellor is a member of all three organs of government.
Although Parliament is the main legislative organ, the courts and the executive both have legislative responsibilities.
Government ministers have legislative, executive and judicial functions.
Indeed it is extremely difficult to establish any truly satisfactory system of defining the limits of these functions.
Rather they seem to merge.
Yet it has proved necessary to attempt this task to determine the appropriate checks and balances in the system.
Quite clearly the court's attitude to intervention to control and abuse of power is affected by the nature of the power being exercised.
(See Re Racal Communications Ltd.
(H. L., 1981) and Vine v. National Dock Labour Board (H.L., 1957)).
Prerogative power
The powers of the state must be exercised in accordance with the law by virtue of authority granted by the law.
In modern times this authority is generally granted by statute but certain powers, rights and immunities appertaining to the Crown still have their origins in the common law.
These, originally exercised by the monarch personally, are known as prerogative powers.
These may relate to the legislative functions of government.
For example the administration of overseas territories has been accomplished by means of orders in council issued by virtue of the royal prerogative.
An example of a judicial prerogative is the prerogative of mercy.
The prerogative gives the state widespread powers regarding the disposition and control of the armed forces, power to take action in an emergency, authority to make treaties and declarations of war and peace, and still remains of some importance in foreign affairs.
The prerogative may be superseded by statute.
Where the statutory provision deals with the same area, the prerogative may be extinguished either expressly or by implication.
(See Att. -Gen. v. De Keyser's Royal Hotel (H.L., 1920)).
In the past the courts have been willing to interfere only to a limited extent in the use of prerogative power.
In Laker Airways v.  Department of Trade (H.
C., 1976) the court indicated that while it would determine the existence and the scope of the prerogative power, it would not review the propriety or adequacy of the grounds on which it had been exercised.
This followed cases such as Chandler v. D.P.P.
(H.L., 1964) where the court refused to review the way in which prerogative power was used.
In Council for Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service (H. L., 1984) the House of Lords went some way towards the view that they could control the way the prerogative was exercised.
It is clear from the decision that they would only be prepared to do this in clear cases of abuse of power and would impose a much higher standard than in the case of an exercise of statutory power.
There was also an unwillingness to interfere in cases involving security of the state.
In R. v. Panel on Take-overs and Mergers, ex p.
Datafin plc (C.A., 1987) the court clearly stated that government power may be reviewable whatever its source.
In R. v. Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, ex p.
Everett (H.C., 1989) it was held that the court had jurisdiction to review a decision to refuse to issue a passport even although this involved the exercise of a prerogative power.
It has been suggested that any remaining reluctance to review the exercise of the prerogative stems not from the source of the power but from its subject-matter which will often be non-justiciable.
THE CABINET AND THE PRIME MINISTER
Constitutionally all major government decisions are taken by the Cabinet, a committee of senior government ministers.
It is for the cabinet to determine the policies to be submitted to Parliament, to determine the content and priorities of legislative proposals, and to ensure that the relevant policies are carried out.
By convention all members of the cabinet are collectively responsible for decisions taken.
While the matter is under discussion ministers can air their views but once the matter is decided all members of the Government, whether within the cabinet or not, must support it.
If they are unable to do this then they should resign as Michael Hesseltine did during the Westland affair.
The force with which this convention is observed has varied with the political climate.
Indeed it was formally suspended during the campaign prior to the referendum on continuing membership of the EEC.
There are no rules prescribing the size of the Cabinet.
It has varied this century from small war time cabinets where the ministers have had 110 departmental responsibilities, to cabinets consisting of more than 20 ministers representing all the main departments of state.
Increasingly it appears that the cabinet operates through a network of committees, the result being that ministers may be bound by decisions in which they have had little more than nominal participation.
As with the Cabinet itself, the office of Prime Minister is one which is barely recognised in law.
This century has seen a steady increase in the powers of the Prime Minister who is now in a very strong position.
(a) As leader of the party in power, he has been chosen by the electorate, has control over the party machinery and can normally rely on the strength of party loyalty to maintain his position.
His public profile is higher than that of any other minister.
(b) As chairman of the cabinet, he can to a large extent determine the nature of discussions within cabinet.
No votes are customarily taken.
Rather, the Prime Minister sums up the sense of the meeting.
Matters can be referred to sub-committees, the agenda manipulated to ensure the desired result.
(c) As ultimate head of the civil service, the Prime Minister has certain powers over senior appointments and access to all information.
(d) The Cabinet Office, although technically providing a service for all members of the cabinet, has grown, in recent years into the Prime Minister's special source of assistance and information.
This greatly strengthens the Prime Minister's ability to argue against proposals put forward by departmental ministers who are forced to rely almost entirely on the briefs prepared for them by their departmental civil servants.
(e) The Prime Minister is the source of much patronage.
He appoints and dismisses government ministers and has at his disposal a wide selection of public appointments, honours, etc.
It is, however, wrong to think of the Prime Minister as having absolute power.
However dominant, he must keep the support of his party both inside and outside Parliament.
Ultimately his strength will depend on his personality, but as Rodney Brazier points out, when affairs go badly his authority will wane and if luck deserts him he may well be finished.
Government Departments
The various tasks undertaken by Central Government are executed by Government Departments such as the Treasury, the Home Office, the Department of the Environment.
The organisation and responsibilities of these vary from time to time.
Such changes are effected by Order in Council made under the Ministers of the Crown Act 1975.
At the head of each is a government minister, normally assisted by one or more junior ministers.
Each minister will have a Parliamentary Private Secretary.
By convention these will all be members of Parliament although not necessarily from the House of Commons.
There is no legal limit on the number of ministers but there is a limit on the number who can sit and vote in the Commons (House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975, s.2(1)), presently 95 and a limit to the number of ministerial salaries which can be paid (Ministerial and other Salaries Act 1975).
The departments are staffed by professional civil servants, each one headed by a Permanent Secretary.
Civil servants must serve whatever government is in power even if they are not in sympathy with that government's views.
To ensure this impartiality there are stringent restrictions on the degree of political involvement permitted to civil servants.
Ministerial responsibility
By convention, ministers are responsible to Parliament for the conduct of their departments (Carltona v. Commissioner of Works (C.A., 1943)).
In practical terms this may mean:(a) Ministers may be legally responsible for the acts and omissions of their department.
(b) Ministers are accountable to Parliament which has the right to question the minister on any aspect of the work of the department, even regarding events prior to his taking office.
(c) The degree of personal responsibility depends on the circumstances.
Herbert Morrison once argued that ministers were responsible for every stamp stuck on every envelope and that if faults occurred within a department, the minister was at fault in that he had failed to lay down adequate procedures and systems of control.
The modern tendency is that the minister is not required to shelter a civil servant who has acted improperly, particularly if he has disobeyed instructions or failed to follow established procedures.
Ministers who feel that they are in some way personally to blame, will normally resign, as for example Lord Carrington as Foreign Secretary following the Argentinian invasion of the Falkland Islands and ministers such as John Profumo and Cecil Parkinson who were involved in personal scandals.
Otherwise, if a minister is criticised, no clear pattern emerges as to whether he will resign.
Largely this is a political question depending on a number of factors such as the government's strength and the need to relieve pressure on it.
(See the resignation of Leon Brittan during the Westland's affair).
THE AVAILABILITY OF OFFICIAL INFORMATION
The traditional attitude of government has been that official information should remain secret unless the government chooses to make it available.
This has sometimes been justified on security grounds but often the argument has been that disclosure is not in the public interest, that "secrecy is at all times the condition in which the best men make the best decisions." 
The series of legal actions initiated by the Government to suppress publication of the memoirs of a former intelligence agent, Peter Wright, indicates the lengths to which the Government will go to ensure confidentiality.
In A. G. v. Guardian Newspapers (No. 2)(H.L., 1988) it was accepted that the Crown had a right to attempt to restrain disclosure of confidential information relating to the operation of the security services but that they must establish that the disclosure was in some way damaging to the public interest.
In view of the widespread publicity given to Peter Wright's book "Spycatcher" it was felt that such damage could not now be established and the injunction against publication was discharged.
Cabinet discussions
The courts have protected the secrecy of cabinet discussions by granting injunctions and by refusing applications for discovery of documents.
In Att.Gen. v. Jonathan Cape Ltd.
(H.C., 1976) the court held that it had the power to restrain publication of material relating to such discussions although the power was not then exercised.
In Conway v. Rimmer (H.L., 1968) the need for secrecy was justified because:(a) it ensured full and frank discussion within the cabinet;(b) it helped to preserve the convention of collective responsibility;(c) it protected governments from ill-formed or captious criticism.
This is less than convincing and the suspicion exists that the true reason for secrecy is to protect governments against criticism.
It is interesting to contrast the attitude of the British courts with that of the American Supreme Court where, in the Pentagon Papers Case, an order to restrain publication of accounts of high level discussion about policy in Vietnam, was refused.
The Public Records Acts 1958–67
These protect cabinet documents and other government papers for 30 years, unless the Government chooses to make them available.
The period can be extended if continued secrecy is deemed to be in the public interest.
An informal attempt to provide more official information was begun in 1977 when following the "Croham Directive" there was encouragement to government departments to make available background material relating to policy studies and reports.
These, it said, should be made available as a matter of course unless a positive decision was taken to suppress the material.
However, the effect of this was negligible and as it proved to be an expensive exercise, it was an early casualty of government spending cuts.
In 1981, the Wilson Committee recommended that more papers should be released within the 30-year period and that as few as possible should be withheld beyond 30 years.
A 1982 White Paper again recommended greater disclosure suggesting that if the document itself could not be issued, material should be disclosed to enable the public to know the type of information which was being withheld.
The White Paper accepted that it was sometimes necessary for whole categories of documents to remain secret but felt that the existence of such categories should be reviewed every 20 years.
The Official Secrets Acts 1911–1989
The overwhelming climate of secrecy has long been encouraged and supported by the Official Secrets Acts 1911–1920 which have been used not simply to prevent disclosure of security information but to prevent the disclosure of all information which governments have chosen not to disclose.
The whole emphasis of the first Act in 1889 was on espionage and treason.
The aim of the 1911 Act was to strengthen the law against spying.
Section 1 covers all forms of spying making it an offence if any person, for purposes prejudicial to the interests of the state:(a) approaches, inspects…enters any prohibited place; or (b) makes any sketch, plan, model or note which…might be useful to the enemy: or (c) obtains or communicates to any other person any information…calculated or intended to be, or which might be useful to the enemy.
In Chandler v. D.P.P.
(H.L., 1964) members of a group supporting nuclear disarmament were convicted under section 1 following an incident where they entered an R.A.F. base and attempted to obstruct its use.
This sabotage was held to fall within the conduct prohibited by section 1.
The House of Lords held that the question whether the conduct was prejudicial to the interests of the state was for the court and not for the jury.
Section 2 of the 1920 Act provides that communicating with a foreign agent is evidence of obtaining or attempting to obtain  information calculated or intended to be useful to an enemy contrary to section 1 of the Act.
But section 2 of the 1911 Act went far beyond spying, making it an offence to disclose or receive official information.
This was not confined to security information but encompassed any information which was not in the interests of the state to disclose.
The courts made it very clear that they equated the interests of the state with the interests of the government then in power.
(See McCowan J. in R. v. Ponting (H.C., 1985)).
This offered the temptation to Government to use section 2 to protect itself against potentially damaging disclosures.
For example in the "whistleblower" trials of Sarah Tisdall and Clive Ponting no matters of national security seemed to arise.
Their disclosures were, however, likely to cause serious political embarrassment to the Government.
As long ago as 1972 the Franks Committee recommended the repeal of this catch-all section but despite several abortive attempts, it was not until 1989 that section 2 was repealed.
The Official Secrets Act 1989 is designed to protect more limited classes of official information than that covered by the old section 2 which is repealed.
Section 1(1) makes it an offence for any member or former member of the security and intelligence services to disclose information relating to these services.
In the case of disclosure of information on defence, international relations, crime, information resulting from unauthorised disclosures or entrusted in confidence by a crown servant, sections 2–6 make disclosure an offence if made without lawful authority and causing damage to the public interest.
This is subject to the defence that the accused did not know the nature of the information or realise that its disclosure would be damaging.
While narrowing the old section 2, the act is unlikely to give protection to a "whistleblower" who felt that the public should be told certain information as any defence depends on disclosure being considered to be in the public interest and that would still seem to mean "the interests of the state according to its recognised organs of government and the policies expounded by the particular government of the day" per McCowan I. in Ponting's case.
The new act clearly falls far short of the demand for freedom of information legislation with a presumption that all official information is in the public domain except where there are clearly defined reasons for restricting disclosure and where there is adequate monitoring to ensure that civil servants and politicians are committed to implementing the principles behind the legislation.
Secrecy can be damaging in that:(a) the sources of power and influence are obscured;(b) public servants are not properly accountable;(c) public participation is seriously hampered;(d) justice is not often seen to be done;(e) inefficiency and error are made more likely.
The 1989 Act merely nibbles at the edges.
Full scale reform of official secrets legislation is still very much a topic of current debate.
The "D" notice system
This is a system of self censorship followed by the media in security matters.
Much journalistic material is obtained from official sources "off the record." 
Because of the width of our official secrets legislation, the use of such information constitutes a breach of the Acts.
Although prosecutions are rare, editors require some guidance as to whether action is likely to follow a particular disclosure.
This informal guidance is given by the Defence, Press and Broadcasting Committee which is composed of representatives of government and media.
It issues "D" notices advising that those matters listed should not be published as they require to remain secret for security reasons.
Categories of information presently covered include information about nuclear weapons, the British Intelligence Services and the country's readiness for war.
Editors can submit individual stories to the committee for guidance.
It should be noted that any clearance is purely informal and does not give any immunity from prosecution.
Conversely, publication in breach of a "ID" notice is not, of itself, a criminal offence although the likelihood is that it will fall within the ambit of the legislation.
PUBLIC INTEREST IMMUNITY
In the course of a civil action, one party may wish to inspect documents in the possession of the other side.
To obtain these it is possible to ask the court to order discovery.
An important restriction to this right is the "privilege" granted to the Crown and other public bodies to oppose discovery on the ground that publication is not in the public interest.
The extent of this immunity was stated most widely in Duncan v. Cammel Laird (H. L., 1942), where a claim by the Admiralty that documents relating to the construction of a submarine should not be disclosed, was upheld.
The House of Lords said that the Crown could claim immunity:(a) where the contents of the document were such that objection could be made in the national interest to their disclosure;(b) where the documents, although themselves harmless, fell within a class of documents which should always be withheld.
Their lordships said that in matters of the public interest, government ministers and not the courts, were the best judge.
Accordingly it felt that the minister's affidavit opposing discovery must be accepted as final and conclusive.
This decision enabled the Crown to prohibit, as a matter of course, the disclosure of a wide range of information such as correspondence with government departments, medical records and accident reports, on the ground that disclosure might set a precedent and lead to potentially harmful documents being disclosed in the future.
As the courts were unwilling to look behind the minister's affidavit, there was a clear risk that the minister might misuse his power to ensure secrecy for no better reason than administrative convenience.
Although there was a voluntary curtailment of the use of this privilege in 1956, the position was severely criticised by the Court of Appeal in three cases in 1965.
The House of Lords reconsidered the question in Conway v. Rimmer (1968).
Conway, a probationary police officer, was dismissed from the police force and subsequently brought an action for malicious prosecution against a superior officer.
He applied for discovery of certain internal police reports.
The Home Secretary opposed discovery, alleging that production would not be in the public interest as the reports fell within a class of documents that should always be protected.
The House of Lords decided that the affidavit was not conclusive and that, where appropriate, it had the power to inspect the documents in private and decide whether to accept the claim.
It said that in reaching its decision, it had to balance two competing factors:(a) The public interest that requires the evidence to remain secret.
This could be as a result of considerations of national security.
It could be the need to protect the identity of informants.
(See, e.g. Lonrho v. Shell Petroleum (H.L., 1980) but cf.
Peach v. Commissioner of the Police of the Metropolis (C.A. 1986)).
It could be the need to preserve the secrecy of a class of documents.
(See the arguments above justifying secrecy for cabinet documents).
(b) The interests of justice which must ensure that all relevant evidence is available to the court.
An additional factor to be taken into account was added by the case of Air Canada v. Secretary of State (No. 2)(H.L., 1983), namely  the applicant's need for the documents.
The applicant must establish that they would be useful in his case.
Following Conway v. Rimmer, the courts have on a number of occasions ordered disclosure against the wishes of the Crown.
(For example in Norwich Pharmacal Co. v. Commissioners of Customs and Excise (H.L., 1974) and Burmah Oil v. Bank of England (H.L., 1979)).
None of these have involved security considerations although they have tended to assume that the right to overrule the claim of immunity exists in all cases.
Nevertheless there is considerable reluctance to question the minister's judgment unless there is a suggestion of bad faith or error on the part of the minister.
Conway v. Rimmer retained the possibility of "class" claims.
Although in Burmah Oil there was a reluctance to accept the "class" arguments without looking at the actual contents of the documents in question, subsequent cases have accepted class arguments without question.
PARLIAMENT
THE COMPOSITION OF PARLIAMENT
Parliament consists of three elements:(a) The Monarch.
(b) The House of Lords.
(c) The House of Commons.
The House of Lords
The Lords Temporal.
(a) Hereditary Peers and Peeresses in their own right of the United Kingdom including:(i) Holders of titles created in the peerage of England before Union with Scotland in 1707. (ii) Holders of titles created in the peerage of Great Britain.
(iii) All Scottish Peers of the Realm,(Peerage Act 1963, s.4.)(b) Life Peers appointed under the Life Peerages Act 1958.
(c) Lords of Appeal in Ordinary (The Law Lords).
The Lords Spiritual.
26 Bishops of the Church of England, viz: Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Bishops of London, Durham and Winchester and 21 other Bishops in order of seniority of appointment.
They sit only so long as they continue to hold episcopal office.
Disqualification for membership of House of Lords:(a) Aliens.
(b) Persons under 21. (c) Undischarged bankrupts. (d) Persons convicted of Treason — until sentence completed or pardon granted — Forfeiture Act 1870. (e) Members expelled by the House unless pardoned.
The House of Commons
There are 650 M.P.s elected on a constituency basis by those entitled to vote by virtue of the Representation of the People Act 1983.
All Commonwealth citizens and citizens of the Republic of Ireland are entitled to vote if they are 18, are resident in a parliamentary constituency on the qualifying date, and are not subject to any legal incapacity and appear in the appropriate register of electors.
The presiding officer must decide, when a person tries to vote, if he is suffering from mental illness, is subnormal, intoxicated and so lacks the capacity to understand what he is doing.
Convicted criminals in penal institutions are disqualified as are persons convicted of certain corrupt or illegal practices at elections.
Elections are conducted by virtue of the "first past the post system," that is the candidate with the largest number of votes in a constituency is returned.
Disqualification for membership of the House of Commons:(a) Aliens.
(Note — citizens of Eire are not barred).
(b) Persons under 21. (c) Persons of "unsound mind" Mental Health Act 1983, s.141. (d) Peers and peeresses in their own right unless there has been a disclaimer under the Peerage Act 1963. (e) Clergy ordained in Church of England and Ireland, Ministers of the Church of Scotland and Roman Catholic Priests.
(f) Bankrupts until discharged — Insolvency Act 1986, s.427. (g) Persons guilty of corrupt or illegal practices at elections.
The extent of the disqualification depends on the precise offence-Representation of the People Act, 1983, Part III.
(h) Persons guilty of treason-until sentence completed or pardon granted.
(i) A person convicted of an offence and sentenced to a term of imprisonment for more than one year — Representation of the People Act 1981.
This covers imprisonment in the United Kingdom or the Republic of Ireland.
(j) Those disqualified under the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975 as holding "an office or place of profit under the Crown." 
This includes:(i) Most major judicial offices (but not magistrates).
(ii) Civil servants, members of the armed forces and the police.
(iii) Membership of any legislature outside the Commonwealth.
Euro M.P.s are not, however, disqualified.
(iv) Members of various boards, administrative bodies, chairmen of many public authorities.
(v) Under section 4 of the Act, the holders of certain specified offices are disqualified, for example the Steward of the Chiltern Hundreds.
An M.P.
who wishes to "resign" his seat must apply for one of the above offices of profit and thereby disqualify himself from sitting.
THE WORK OF PARLIAMENT
The passage of legislation
Origins of legislation
At the beginning of each Parliamentary session, the Monarch opens Parliament with a speech from the throne which outlines the Government's main proposals for the session.
The programme will have been carefully considered by the Cabinet which decides on a timetable for the introduction of legislation.
The details of this task are entrusted to the Future Legislation Committee of the Cabinet which has to cope with a flood of requests from the various Departments of State who all wish to have their proposals included.
The preparation of legislation is often a lengthy process.
The content and policy of the Bill must be approved by the appropriate cabinet committee and then by the full Cabinet.
Reform may sometimes be preceded by Green or White Papers allowing pre-legislative consultation in Parliament.
Consultation will also take place with various interest groups.
By the end of this pre-legislative stage the main content of the bill is effectively settled although  further negotiations between the various interested parties continue throughout the passage through Parliament.
Responsibility for drafting the Bill is with the Parliamentary Draftsmen, officially known as Parliamentary Counsel to the Treasury.
Their draft is scrutinised by the Legislation Committee of the Cabinet.
The Lord Chancellor's Office and the Law Officers are also likely to examine the Bill to consider such matters as the proper legal wording and the practicalities of implementation.
Procedure for the passing of a Public Bill introduced by the Government into the House of Commons
I. First Reading.
A purely formal stage.
The title of the Bill is read out, an order is made for the Bill to be published and a date fixed for the second reading.
2.
Second Reading.
The principles of the Bill are discussed on the floor of the House.
The Bill is voted on.
3.
Committee Stage.
A detailed clause by clause analysis of the Bill by a standing committee of between 1–50 M.P.s.
Detailed amendments are considered.
4.
Report Stage.
The Bill is reported back to the whole House as amended.
Further amendments, usually government sponsored, can be made at this stage.
5.
Third Reading.
Once again the whole House considers the principles behind the legislation.
Only verbal amendments can be made and any debate must be supported by at least six members.
Once a Bill has passed its Commons' stage it goes up to the House of Lords where the same process is repeated, except that the Committee stage is taken on the floor of the House.
If the Bill is amended in the House of Lords, these amendments must be considered by the Commons.
Often these amendments are tabled by the Government and so there is no problem in ensuring that the Commons will approve them.
If, however, the amendments are rejected by the Commons, the Lords must decide whether to persist with these.
If no agreement is reached before the end of the Session, the Bill will fail.
The Government must then decide whether to reintroduce the measure in the following session and invoke the provisions of the Parliament Acts 1911–1949.
Once the Bill is passed by both Houses it receives the Royal Assent.
This is purely formal.
Variations on this procedure
1.
Bills may start life in either House.
The Government must try to arrange its business to ensure that the Commons does not have all its work at the beginning of the session and the House of Lords has all its work at the end.
Generally less controversial bills, e.g. technical legal bills are selected to start life in the Lords, high profile political bills in the Commons.
As the House of Commons has sole responsibility for financial matters, it has to carry the burden of the work on financial bills.
2.
Some Bills have their Second Reading Stage in Committee.
This is on the motion of a minister but can be prevented if 20 members object.
This procedure was introduced in an attempt to save time on the floor of the House and is used for unopposed and non controversial legislation.
If the Second Reading is in Committee, the Report Stage will also be in Committee.
3.
Some Bills have their committee stage on the floor of the House in the Commons.
This procedure can be used for:(a) non-controversial bills where the committee stage would be purely formal;(b) bills of major constitutional importance where all members wish to be involved at every stage;(c) bills passed in an emergency;(d) major clauses of Finance Bills.
In these cases Committee and Report Stages will be combined.
4.
Bills relating to Scotland alone may be referred to the Scottish Grand Committee unless ten members object.
Effectiveness of parliamentary scrutiny of legislation
It has been argued that the present procedure for the passage of legislation does not provide effective scrutiny, that Parliament simply legitimises that which the Government has decreed.
The following factors might indicate that scrutiny is ineffective.
1.
The Government has a majority in the Commons and can force its measures through relying on such factors as the "whip system" and party loyalty.
2.
The Government has control over the Parliamentary time-table and can curtail discussion and bring matters to a vote by the use of various procedural devices such as the "closure." 
Even in Committee there is no guarantee that every clause will be examined in detail.
If a voluntary timetable cannot be agreed then the Government can "guillotine" proceedings.
3.
Legislation has increased in volume and complexity over the years.
M.P.s may lack the necessary expertise to scrutinise  it effectively and may lack the necessary independent information.
4.
There is a basic conflict between the need for technical scrutiny of legislation and the political need to oppose the legislation, to make it unworkable rather than improve it.
As has been pointed out "the purpose of many opposition amendments is not to make the Bill more generally acceptable but to make the Government less generally acceptable." 
5.
The power of the House of Lords to amend legislation is limited by the Parliament Acts 1911–1949.
(a) There is no effective power to delay or veto a money bill.
This is a Bill certified by the Speaker as containing only provisions relating to the imposition, repeal or regulation of taxation, the imposition or variation of charges on the consolidated fund, etc., supply, the appropriation, receipt, custody, issue or audit of accounts of public money, the raising or guarantee of any loan or the repayment thereof, or subordinate matters incidental to any of the above topics.
The Speaker's certificate is conclusive.
(b) In the case of other public Bills (excluding a Bill to extend the life of Parliament) the House of Lords has no power of veto, only a power of delay.
If a Bill is passed by the Commons in two successive sessions having been rejected by the Lords, it can be presented for the Royal Assent provided that one year has elapsed between the date of its second reading in the Commons in the first session and the date of its passing by the Commons in the second session.
Yet Bills are considerably amended during their passage through Parliament.
New clauses may be added.
Concessions will be made.
Parliamentary scrutiny is still important:(a) It ensures the measure is publicised allowing opinion outside Parliament to make itself felt.
(b) The Government may be able to ignore the opposition but it cannot afford to ignore its own supporters.
Back-bench revolts are not unknown, e.g. the Shops Bill in 1986, and many government sponsored amendments represent concessions made by Government to its own supporters.
(c) The establishment of Departmental Select Committees has increased the flow of independent information to M.P.s and increased specialist knowledge amongst back-benchers enabling them to scrutinise legislation more effectively.
There has been limited use of a new procedure at the committee stage where evidence is taken from expert witnesses, as in the Criminal Attempts Act 1981.
Little use has been made of the power recently.
(d) Party ties are less strong in committee and defeats do occur for the Government.
It may then be a difficult political task to reverse these defeats on the floor of the House.
(e) If the House of Lords exercises its power of delay, it ensures maximum publicity for the measure in question.
Amendments are sometimes accepted by the Government against its better judgment to prevent disruption of the Parliamentary timetable.
For example the paving legislation preceding the abolition of the Greater London Council and the various Metropolitan Authorities was drastically amended and the Education (Corporal Punishment) Bill was withdrawn in 1985 following the insertion of a wrecking amendment.
It had been said in the past that there was a convention that the House of Lords would not pass amendments calculated to alter the kernel of a bill approved by the Commons, but in recent years amendments have gone much further than altering the fine details of the Bill.
Although it has been traditionally assumed that Labour Governments are more susceptible to defeat in the Lords than Conservative administrations, Brazier concludes that the Lords have been surprisingly even-handed in dealing out legislative defeats.
Private Members' Bills
Backbenchers can introduce Bills in the following circumstances: 1.
By being successful in the Ballot.
2.
Under the 10-Minute Rule.
3.
Under Standing Order 58.
On average 10–12 Private Members' Bills become law each session.
These are mainly Ballot Bills.
Ballot Bills.
At a ballot at the beginning of each session, 20 names are drawn out of the hat by the Deputy Speaker.
Those members, in order, have an opportunity to introduce their bills before the House.
Twelve Fridays are set aside in each session for the passage of such bills although the Government can give extra time to measures it supports to ensure success.
The subjects chosen are wide ranging.
A number of important social reforms have resulted from ballot bills such as abortion and divorce law reform.
Many useful, but low priority bills have their origins in this procedure.
The only restriction is that the main purpose of the Bill must not be public expenditure.
If some incidental expenditure is involved, the member must persuade a minister to move a financial resolution.
The procedure is identical to that of any other public bill.
Responsibility for drafting the bill and printing is borne by the  Member although financial assistance is given to the first ten members and drafting assistance is given to any member whose bill appears to have a chance of becoming law.
Not all ballot bills will be successful.
As well as shortage of time, the bill can be defeated on a vote or it can be talked out.
It may be Impossible to force a division as the support of 100 M.P.s is needed for the closure.
It may also be difficult to maintain a quorum (40).
10-Minute-Rule Bills.
Under Standing Order 19 on Tuesdays and Wednesdays after Question Time, one member, selected by the Speaker on a first come, first served basis, has ten minutes in which to outline his proposal for legislation.
One speech in reply is permitted and the question is then put.
It is extremely unlikely that legislation will result from this.
Indeed the member will not have a draft bill.
The main purpose of this procedure is not to initiate legislation but to generate publicity for a particular issue or to test the water to see if there is support for legislation in the future.
Even if a "bill" succeeds at this stage, there is no further time allocated for the remaining stages and so, unless the Government gives up some of its time, the bill will not proceed further.
A recent report by the Select Committee on Procedure criticised the abuse of this process for publicity purposes and recommended that the text of any bill proposed should be first lodged with the Public Bill Office.
No action has been taken on this.
Standing Order 58.
Under Standing Order 58 a member may present a bill without obtaining leave from the House.
This allows a member to take advantage of any gap in the Parliamentary timetable (these are rare) and present a measure.
Only fairly simple, non-controversial bills are likely to succeed by this method.
Delegated legislation
Not all legislation is made directly by Parliament.
Government ministers, local authorities and other public bodies have been given the power by statute to make subordinate legislation.
This may be in the form of statutory instruments and orders, byelaws, regulations and orders in council.
The most important type of delegated legislation made by a minister is a statutory instrument.
This is defined and regulated by The Statutory Instruments Act 1946.
Delegated legislation made by a minister acting under statutory authority which does not fall within this definition, is known as a  statutory order.
There is no more precise definition as it is simply a residual category.
Statutory orders are not regulated by the 1946 Act.
Uses of delegated legislation
Delegated legislation is used mainly to add detail to primary legislation which may lay down the general principles although matters of considerable importance are sometimes dealt with in this way.
The use of delegated legislation saves Parliamentary time:(a) Parliament can concentrate on the principles and ignore the details which can be worked out elsewhere.
(b) If the law requires updating this can be done without taking up time on the floor of the House.
It can also be said that the use of delegated legislation is desirable:(a) it allows a certain flexibility in the law.
It enables the minister, for example, to bring sections of an act into effect as and when required.
It allows for regional variations.
It even allows for a degree of experimentation in that the delegated legislation can be used to alter provisions in the parent act.
(b) it facilitates full consultation with experts.
Consideration of detailed, technical, legislation in the contentious atmosphere of the floor of the House cannot be desirable.
But it does have its dangers, particularly when used to effect changes of substance.
Then it can be argued that too much power is being concentrated in the hands of the minister.
The procedure is much less public than that for the passage of Acts of Parliament.
Clearly it is essential that, to prevent abuse, there is adequate control.
Control over delegated legislation:
The enabling act.
The law-making power which Parliament intends to delegate should be expressed in clear and unambiguous language.
The grant of wide discretionary powers makes it much more difficult to control the exercise of these powers by means of the doctrine of ultra vires.
The enabling act also determines the form in which the power is to be exercised.
Greater control will be achieved by providing that the power is to be exercised by way of statutory instrument.
It will then be regulated by the Statutory Instruments Act 1946 and will, if laid before Parliament, be subject to the scrutiny of the Joint Committee on Delegated Legislation.
Laying before Parliament.
The enabling act can provide that the instrument is to be laid before either or both Houses of Parliament.
Various types of laying procedures are used:(a) Greatest control is achieved by making the order subject to an affirmative resolution.
This means the instrument will not come into effect until approved by Parliament in accordance with the laying requirement.
The Government must then make time for the resolution to be discussed although, as the Government has a majority and can normally force its measures through, it is unusual for such resolutions to be unsuccessful.
(b) Where an order is subject to a negative resolution it must be laid before Parliament (usually for 40 days) during which time a member can move a prayer to annul it.
The order may come into effect as soon as it is signed by the relevant minister.
If annulled it will simply cease being law.
Attempts to annul such orders are rarely successful.
Prayers must be moved at the end of the day's business, an unpopular time.
Time for discussion is severely limited.
The Government will normally have a majority and even if defeated, can reintroduce the measure and pressurise its supporters to defeat the motion.
The order cannot be amended, simply withdrawn.
(c) Other forms of laying procedure are laying for information only and laying in draft.
Section 4 of the Statutory Instruments Act 1946 says that where a statutory instrument is required to be laid before Parliament then it shall be laid before the instrument comes into operation.
This is subject to the proviso that where it is essential that an instrument comes into effect immediately, it can be brought into effect before it is laid, but that the Speaker and/or Lord Chancellor should be informed of this and the reason for it.
In R. v. Sheer Metalcraft (H.
C., 1954) Streatfield J. said that a statutory instrument was complete "when made and laid." 
Together with section 4 this suggests that laying is a mandatory procedural requirement.
However R. v. Secretary of State for the Environment, ex p.
Leicester C.C. (N.C., 1985) said that where an order had to be laid before Parliament, laying before the House of Commons was sufficient as there had been substantial compliance with the procedural requirements.
Publication.
One difficulty in ensuring adequate scrutiny of delegated legislation is that not all delegated legislation need be  published.
In the case of statutory orders, any specific requirements as to publication must be stated in the enabling act.
Statutory instruments are regulated by section 2 of the Act and must be sent to the Queen's Printer, numbered and put on sale.
Some statutory instruments are exempt from this requirement by virtue of the Statutory Instruments Regulations 1947.
This exempts instruments of a local or temporary nature, bulky Schedules and instruments which, in the opinion of the minister, it is not in the public interest to publish.
Failure to comply with section 2 does not render the order invalid.
(Sheer Metalcraft, supra).
It should, however, be noted, that section 3(2) of the Act provides a limited defence in the case of a person charged with an offence under an unpublished statutory instrument.
In any proceedings it shall be a defence for the accused to prove that, at the date of the alleged contravention, the instrument had not been issued by Her Majesty's Stationery Office.
It is then up to the Minister to defeat the defence by proving that he had taken reasonable steps to bring the purport of the instrument to the notice of the public or of persons likely to be affected by it, or of the person charged.
It is unlikely that this defence will be available in the case of every unpublished statutory instrument.
The wording of section 3(2) appears to confine it to instruments which should have been published but, in fact, were not.
This would exclude instruments exempted by the Minister under the 1947 regulations and other types of delegated legislation.
How strictly the section is to be construed remains in some doubt.
Scrutiny by Parliamentary Committee.
The Joint Committee on Statutory Instruments, which comprises seven members from each House plus a chairman drawn from the Opposition benches in the Commons, can examine all general statutory instruments and all other statutory orders subject to the affirmative procedure or special procedure orders.
It is not concerned with the merits of the instruments but rather with whether the special attention of the House should be drawn to the legislation in that it:(a) imposes a tax or fee on the public or a charge on the public revenue;(b) is made pursuant of an enactment containing specific provisions excluding it from challenge in the courts;(c) purports to have retrospective effect when there is no express authority in the enabling statute;(d) has been unduly delayed in publication or laying before Parliament;(e) has come into operation before being laid before Parliament and there has been unjustifiable delay in informing the Speaker;(f) is of doubtful vires or makes some unusual or unexpected use of the powers conferred by the enabling statute;(g) calls for any special reason of form or content, for elucidation;(h) is defective in its drafting.
The Committee can consider only a fraction of the instruments laid before Parliament.
Even when the Committee draws special attention to an instrument, no special Parliamentary notice need be taken.
Indeed, by the time the Committee has reported, the instrument in question may have been dealt with.
Scrutiny by the Courts.The courts may be asked to consider whether delegated legislation is ultra vires the enabling act.
(See Chap.
6.)
In interpreting the width of the power to make delegated legislation, the courts will apply certain presumptions, e.g. (a) that there is no power to impose a tax unless stated expressly (Att. -Gen. v. Wilts United Dairies (C.A., 1921); and (b) that there is no power to oust the citizen's right of access to the courts (Chester v. Bateson (N.C., 1920)).
Parliamentary scrutiny of the Executive
Not since the nineteenth century can it be said that Parliament has made policy directly.
This function has long since passed to the Cabinet.
Parliament can still influence policy making, acting during the formulation by way of various interest groups and committees and by general expression of opinion on the floor of the House.
Sometimes it is given the opportunity to express its views more formally in the course of debates following the publication of Green and White Papers.
Its impact is limited by the strength of the Government which generally can control its own supporters and rely on its majority in the Commons.
It is, today, simply one of many interest groups attempting to influence the decision-making process.
Parliament has, however, attempted to cling tenaciously to its role in the scrutiny of the implementation of that policy.
After all, constitutionally, ministers are answerable to Parliament for the conduct of their Departments.
There are a number of opportunities in the Parliamentary year to examine the Government's record.
Debates
The Opposition parties have 20 days in each session in which they can select the topic for debate.
Formerly this time was known as "Supply Days" and was used to discuss the grant of supply to the Crown but it has long ceased to be confined to discussion of government spending and is instead used to criticise all aspects of government policy.
The Government itself provides time to debate such matters as the armed services and the EEC, topics traditionally debated during supply days.
Emergency Debates are allowed at the discretion of the Speaker under Standing Order 20 if he considers that an application relates to "a specific and important matter that should have urgent consideration." 
The application must be supported by 40 members.
There is reluctance to allow such debates in view of the considerable disruption caused to the Parliamentary timetable.
There are, on average, two a year.
Certain opportunities are given to backbenchers to choose the subject matter for debate.
Examples are:(a) Adjournment Debates-half hour debates at the end of each day's sitting.
Members ballot for a right to choose a topic and speak.
A government minister will reply.
(b) Ten Fridays and four half days are given for private members' motions.
(c) Adjournment Debates following the passage of the Consolidated Fund and Appropriation Bills.
Apart from Emergency Debates which, because of their rarity will command widespread coverage in the media, such debates have limited value.
The outcome is rarely in doubt.
The opposition of the Opposition can be taken for granted.
More important will be dissent shown during the debates by the Government's own supporters.
Parliamentary Questions
Ministers are questioned in the House on a rota"basis for 45 to 55 minutes on Mondays to Thursdays.
The Prime Minister takes the last 15 minutes of question time on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
Members can give no more than ten days notice of a question and the questions are listed in the order in which they are tabled.
According to Erskine May the purpose is to obtain information, to press for action.
It now appears that question time is used for the following purposes:(a) To embarrass the Government by raising a sensitive issue.
(b) To publicise a particular matter, either nationally or in the M.P.
"s own constituency.
(c) To keep the Minister on his toes, to ensure he is au fait with the activities of his Department.
This is done by asking an "open question" whose significance is not immediately apparent, and following it up with a supplementary.
The Minister may be surprised into revealing more than he intended or reduced to admitting he does not know the answer or even misleading the House.
All these may do considerable damage to his reputation.
Such open questions are widely used during questions to the Prime Minister.
(d) Some questions asked by the Government's own back benchers are "planted" by the Minister to enable him to release information.
(e) Prime Minister's Question time is often used by the Opposition to make political points.
It has variously been described as a "bear baiting session" and "a ritual exchange of non information." 
Thus question time has limited use in obtaining the factual information necessary to enable M.P.s to scrutinise the activities of the Government.
Ministers have warning of questions and need disclose no more information than they think fit and are obliged only to answer those matters which fall within their particular areas of responsibility.
Thus as a formal method of scrutiny it has little value.
Written answers to questions.
Questions not dealt with on the floor of the House are answered in writing by the Minister and the answers published in Hansard.
In addition, questions may be put down for written answer.
Such questions are designed:(a) to obtain factual information;(b) to take up matters on behalf of constituents.
Although these may produce useful information, Ministers are skilled in revealing no more than is necessary.
One basic defect in these methods of scrutiny is that M.P.s must know the right questions to ask.
As Government becomes more complex, it becomes increasingly difficult for M.P.s to have sufficient specialist knowledge to identify the key areas for investigation.
although in recent years there have been significant improvements in the provision of research and library facilities for M.P.s these still lag fir behind those available to their counterparts abroad.
Parliamentary Select Committees
A more effective method of scrutiny than can be employed on the floor of the House is scrutiny by committees of M.P, s.
In particular, the 14 departmental select committees established in 1979 shadow the  various departments of state such as Industry, Education, Environment but excluding the Lord Chancellor's Department.
Three Committees, Foreign Affairs, Home Affairs and Treasury and Civil Service have appointed sub-committees.
Membership.
Committees normally consist of 11 M.P.s, their membership reflecting party balance in the House.
The chairmanships are shared between Conservative and Labour, the Government retaining some of the most sensitive, e.g. Defence, for itself.
The committee members are appointed by the Committee of Selection.
There is keen competition among backbenchers for places on the most prestigious committees and some complaints that the committee of selection tends to appoint main stream party members to the exclusion of formidable establishment critics.
Terms of Reference.
 "To provide continuous and systematic scrutiny of the activities of the public service and to base that scrutiny on the subject areas within the responsibility of the individual Government Departments." 
Specifically the committees have the following functions:(a) To examine the estimates put forward by the department in question, to examine the policy objectives underlying these and consider whether the expenditure incurred would achieve these objectives in an economical manner.
(The committees are supplied with proof copies of the estimates).
(b) To examine all aspects of administration and policy relating to the department.
(c) To undertake special studies of areas of importance within the ambit of the department.
(d) To have a limited function in the examination of legislation particularly in relation to delegated legislation and European Secondary Legislation.
Powers.
The committees are empowered to take evidence from ministers, civil servants and outside experts and to call for the necessary papers and records.
The committee must, however, rely on Parliament to enforce these powers.
In 1982 Arthur Scargill was ordered to appear before the Energy Committee.
Parliament's willingness to assist the committee will depend on the wishes of the Government of the day.
The Select Committee on Defence investigating the "Westlands Affair" wished to question civil service press officers and the Prime Minister's Press Secretary but the Government's refusal to allow them to testify effectively emasculated the committee.
The committee accepted a compromise and took  evidence from Sir Robert Armstrong and another senior civil servant.
When the former Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for Health (Mrs Edwina Currie) had refused to give evidence to the Select Committee on Agriculture, the committee resolved to table a motion in the Commons forcing her attendance.
She agreed to appear.
Assessment.
The committees have produced a considerable amount of valuable information which must assist M.P.s in their general task of scrutiny.
The subjects studied have been wide ranging.
They have not shied away from sensitive areas.
In general it is felt that investigations into specific problems have been more valuable than wide ranging background investigations.
The reports have attracted considerable publicity although only a tiny proportion of the reports have been debated in the House.
Clearly where a committee can issue a quick and reasoned comment on a topical subject it has the greatest impact.
Committees are beginning to time their reports to correspond with appropriate business, such as legislation or a planned debate and this ensures greater coverage of their report.
A major problem has been the delay before the government department in question produces any response to the report.
The Committee on Procedure recommended a maximum of two months but this was not accepted.
While some departments have attempted to adhere to this informally, there have been too many exceptions.
M.P.s themselves appear enthusiastic and keen to participate.
There have been no problems in staffing the committees and the membership has remained relatively static.
This has enabled M.P.s to build up considerable expertise in their chosen fields.
The Committees have all appointed specialist advisors.
There is some evidence that committee members feel themselves less fettered by party ties in committee than on the floor of the House although there has been a tendency for party loyalty to reassert itself if the report is debated.
Yet the Committees cannot force ministers and civil servants to divulge information.
The Osthmotherly Memorandum of guidance to civil servants regarding the information they should reveal to such committees indicates the Government's continuing concern to maintain confidentiality regarding the internal workings of government.
This lead one M.P.
to describe civil servants giving evidence to a committee as being "-paralysed with caution." 
The Government's response to the Defence Committee's report on the Westland's affair stressed that the civil servant's prime duty lay to his minister and that the civil servant should not relate advice given by civil servants to ministers nor give details of exchanges  between government departments in the course of evidence to select committee.
Thus the new system may be an improvement but there is little evidence to support the view that the new committees exercise any real systematic control over the activities of government.
Control over financial matters
Constitutionally, Parliament has control over taxation and expenditure.
Those taxes imposed annually must be authorised by the Finance Act normally passed just before the summer recess.
Authority for levying taxation in the interim period is given by the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act 1968, a resolution of the House of Commons being insufficient authority (Bowles v. The Bank of England (N.C., 1913)).
Government spending must also be approved by Parliament.
The level of spending is normally debated annually, often following a Government White Paper.
The estimates of spending by the various government departments are laid before Parliament for approval in the form of votes"but this is a mere formality.
Spending must be authorised by Parliament.
So, for example, the Annual Appropriation Act will authorise those payments out of the consolidated fund which require annual approval.
Yet there is little detailed Parliamentary control.
Debates on the floor of the House are rarely concerned with matters of detail.
The various departmental select committees looking at the estimates and the Public Accounts Committee looking at the accounts of what has been spent, can only scratch the surface.
There is no parliamentary control over Government borrowing.
The Comptroller and Auditor General, appointed by the Crown on a resolution of the House of Commons by virtue of section 1(1) of the National Audit Act 1983 has two major functions:(a) to ensure that all money paid out of the government accounts has been properly authorised and is properly applied; and (b) to examine the accounts of the, various government departments.
Under the Audit Act 1983 this is more than a traditional audit.
He is entitled to consider whether "objectives have been achieved in the most economical way." 
This has become known as "value for money" and "efficiency" auditing.
He is not, however, entitled to question the merits of the policy itself.
He then reports to the Public Accounts Committee who will follow up a selection of his reports.
The National Audit Office, of which he is head, is also responsible for auditing the accounts of a wide range of bodies dependent on  funds from central government such as the National Health Service and the Universities.
PARLIAMENTARY PRIVILEGE
To ensure that Members of Parliament and Parliament as a whole can carry out their functions effectively, they have certain privileges to safeguard them from outside interference.
Privilege of freedom of speech
To ensure an M.P.
is free to carry out his Parliamentary duties and speak freely without fear of any legal repercussions, an M.P.
has the privilege of free speech.
1.
M.
P.s have absolute privilege with regards words spoken in the course of Parliamentary proceedings.
(The Bill of Rights, Art.
9).
Not only does this protect against actions of defamation but also against any criminal charges.
Nor can they be found to be in contempt of court in relation to words spoken in the course of proceedings in Parliament.
In Church of Scientology v. Johnson Smith (N.C., 1972) an attempt was made to sue an M.
P. claiming that he had slandered the Church of Scientology and its members.
In order to succeed, it was necessary to show that the M.P.
had spoken with malice.
It was attempted to prove this by relying on a speech made by him in Parliament.
The court held that these words could not be used as the words were absolutely privileged.
What are proceedings before Parliament?
It clearly covers, debates, questions and everything said and done by a member both in committee and on the floor of the House.
But as Erskine May points out, it does not follow that everything which is said and done within the confines of the chamber during a debate or other business forms part of a proceeding in Parliament.
It would not, for example, cover a private conversation between two  M.P.s.
Nor does the geographical location of the speaker give automatic protection: Rivilin v. Bilainkin (N.C., 1953).
A private conversation is not a proceeding before Parliament.
Difficulties have arisen as to whether letters written to Ministers by M.P.s in the course of their duties are covered by absolute privilege.
This question arose in the Strauss case in 1958 when an M.P., taking up a matter on behalf of a constituent, made certain allegations against the Electricity Board.
The Chairman of the Board immediately issued a writ for libel.
Strauss alleged that this was an  infringement of his absolute privilege of free speech and as such was a contempt of Parliament.
The matter was referred to the Committee on Privileges which recommended that the matter was covered by absolute privilege but when this was debated by the whole House, it was accepted that writing to a minister was not a proceeding before Parliament.
Accordingly the House rejected the committee's recommendations and ruled that the issuing of the libel writ was not a contempt.
In fact the writ was then withdrawn.
Parliament is not bound to follow this in the future.
Indeed the view has sometimes been expressed that there is a clear advantage in keeping the scope of this privilege indefinite.
Despite this there have been various Parliamentary attempts to define the phrase.
In Session 1969–70 the Select Committee on Privileges recommended that it should cover:(a) all things done or written in each House or in Committee for the purpose of business being transacted;(b) all things done between members and officers, between members, and between members and ministers for the purpose of enabling any of these to carry out their functions.
A possible limitation to this is the suggestion that it would cover only those matters which had been before the House, or at least those coming before the House in the current Parliamentary session.
2.
Qualified Privilege.
An M.P.
may rely on the defence of qualified privilege in regard to words spoken in the course of his duty as an M.P.
This means that he is protected against any action of defamation provided he speaks in good faith and without malice (Beach v. Freeson (H.C., 1972)), and provided there is a common interest between the parties.
In recent years M.P.s have made use of this privilege to make defamatory allegations.
Perhaps the most serious incident was where several M.P.s deliberately identified an officer of the security services who had given evidence in court under the name Colonel B. The court had warned that any attempt to name the officer would be a contempt of court.
No action could be taken by the court against the M.P.s.
While Parliament itself can regulate such matters it has shown itself reluctant to do more than call on "the good sense of M.P.s not to abuse their privilege." 
Reports of Parliamentary Proceedings
At common law no protection was given to those reporting speeches made in Parliament.
The M.P.
was absolutely privileged but  the reporter and the publisher could face civil or criminal action (Stockdale v. Hansard (H.L., 1839), where libel damages were awarded against Hansard who had printed verbatim an authorised House of Commons Report).
Protection is now given by the Parliamentary Papers Act 1840.
Section 1 gives absolute protection against any civil or criminal action to anyone publishing papers printed by order of Parliament.
This will cover, for example, White Papers and Hansard, the daily journal of the House.
If any proceedings based on such papers are initiated, these must be stayed on production of a certificate issued by the Speaker or the Lord Chancellor.
Section 2 gives absolute protection to any copy of such paper.
Section 3 only protects against actions of defamation in that it gives qualified privilege to extracts from any reports protected by sections I and 2.
This means that such extracts are protected provided the defendant can show that they were published in good faith and without malice.
(Dingle v. Associated Newspapers (H. C., 1960)).
Reports of Parliamentary proceedings are protected by the ordinary law of defamation in so far as they are fair and accurate unless the defamed person can prove malice.
The basis of this protection is that publication is deemed to be for the benefit of the public.
In Cook v. Alexander (C.A., 1973) qualified privilege was accorded to a "Parliamentary Sketch" which, although impressionistic and selective, was considered by the court to be sufficiently balanced as to be fair and reasonable.
No special protection has been given to the broadcasting of the proceedings of the House, although it seems likely the defence of qualified privilege to actions of defamation will be available.
Privilege of freedom from arrest
M.Ps have no privilege protecting them against an arrest on criminal charges but they are protected against arrest in connection with a civil matter while parliament is in session and for 40 days before and after.
This is of no real practical importance today.
Parliament's right to determine its own composition
1.
The Commons has the right to fill casual vacancies by calling a by-election.
2.
The Commons can determine the result of disputed elections.
In practice this is now dealt with by an Election Court.
(Representation of the People Act 1983, Pt.
III).
3.
Parliament has the right to determine whether members are legally disqualified.
In the  Wedgwood Benn Case 1961 the House of Commons refused to allow Tony Benn to take his seat although he  had been duly elected.
He had succeeded to a peerage on the death of his father and was disqualified from sitting in the Commons.
4.
The House may expel members whom it considers unfit to serve.
Parliament's right to regulate its own internal proceedings
Parliament is empowered to regulate its own internal proceedings.
It may make standing orders to govern its procedures.
The courts have always refused to consider whether these procedures have been complied with.
Pickin v. British Rail Board (H. L., 1974).
The privilege is much wider than procedural matters, covering every aspect of the internal functions of the House.
In R. v. Graham-Campbell, ex. p.
Herbert (H.C., 1935) the Court refused to investigate an alleged breach of the licensing laws by the "Kitchen Committee" of the House of Commons.
In Bradlaugh v. Gossett (H.C., 1884) Parliament expelled an M.P.
who refused to take the oath of allegiance to the Crown under the Parliamentary Oaths Act 1866, on the ground that he was an atheist and the oath would be meaningless.
At a by-election he was reelected and indicated that he was now willing to take the requisite oath.
Parliament resolved that he should be prevented, if necessary by force, from taking his seat.
It was said that "the House of Commons is not subject to the control of the courts in the administration of that part of statute law which has relevance to its own internal proceedings." 
The court would not intervene.
Parliament's power to punish for contempt
The following have been held to be contempts of Parliament: 1.
An attempt to interfere with a Member's freedom of action.
In the N. U.P.
E. Case (H.C., 1976/77) the national conference of N.U.P.E. passed a resolution demanding that the union's executive withdraw union sponsorship from those M.P.s who supported their party's public expenditure cuts.
The Committee of Privileges found this to be a contempt but no action was taken when the General Secretary of the Union gave assurances that sanctions would not be imposed on M.P.s.
Other attempts to obstruct members in the execution of their duty such as bribery or threats have also constituted contempt.
2.
Misconduct in the House or disobedience to the rules of the House, e.g. failure to co-operate with a Parliamentary Committee, disruptive behaviour in the House.
3.
Misconduct by M.P.s in the House.
When John Profumo was found to have lied to the House this was a contempt.
(Profumo's  Case 1962/63).
Corruption, taking bribes, failure to declare a conflict in interests have all constituted contempts.
4.
Publication of materials reflecting on the proceedings of the House and its members.
Newspaper articles criticising M.P.s have been held to be a contempt.
(Sunday People Case (N.C., 1976/67)).
Publication of false reports of Parliamentary proceedings and premature disclosure of committee proceedings have both constituted contempt.
Thus contempt is wider than simply breach of any of Parliament's privileges but can consist of any conduct which interferes with the workings of Parliament or is likely to bring Parliament or its members into disrepute.
If an M.P.
feels that a contempt has occurred, he first complains to the Speaker who considers whether a breach of privilege has prima facie occurred.
If so, the House has the opportunity to consider whether the matter should be referred to the Committee of Privileges.
The committee then investigates the matter, if necessary, summoning witnesses.
It then reports back to Parliament when the House votes on the report with or without a debate.
Members can be suspended or expelled for contempt.
The House also has the power to admonish or issue a reprimand to those in contempt.
Journalists may be barred from the House for a period of time.
While the House has the power to imprison for contempt, this was last used in 1880.
The House has no power to fine although this has been recommended.
THE ROLE OF THE HOUSE OF LORDS
It has often been argued that the House of Lords should be abolished and that we should have a unicameral system of Government.
The House of Lords has been criticised on the following grounds:
1.
Its composition.
The hereditary nature of the House has been criticised.
It is argued that birth is an illogical and inappropriate criterion for membership.
It draws on a narrow social class who are not representative of the country as a whole.
The introduction of life peerages was partly designed to broaden the base of membership but it can be argued that life peers have not made as large a contribution to the work of the House as had been hoped.
Too often it has been used as a reward for political service.
2.
It is not elected.
It has been argued that it is wrong for such a body to impose even a limited check on the activities of an elected Government.
3.
In the past it was criticised for political bias.
It was alleged that there was an in-built conservative majority.
The introduction of the  life peerage system and the fact that peers can apply for leave of absence at the beginning of each session has tended to redress this although those taking the Conservative Whip constitute the largest single grouping.
In recent years Conservative administrations have faced greater opposition from the House of Lords than have Labour Governments, partly because there is probably a greater fear of a Labour Government curtailing still further the powers of the Lords should it be faced with opposition from that quarter.
Yet it does perform a number of useful functions.
1.
Legislative functions.
(a) A number of bills, mainly non-controversial, start life in the Lords.
(b) The House does a considerable amount of scrutiny of complex and technical legislation.
Many Government amendments are brought in the Lords to save time in the Commons.
(c) It bears the brunt of the examination of private bills.
(d) It does valuable work in the scrutiny of delegated legislation including European Secondary Legislation.
Not only does this save time in the Commons, it provides another type of less politically charged scrutiny by those who may have a wide range of expertise and experience.
2.
Debating function.
The House of Lords provides a useful forum for debating the great issues of the day.
3.
Check on Government.
It is argued that in view of the impotence of the House of Commons and the flexibility of the British Constitution, it is necessary for there to be some check on the activities of Government.
Although limited by the Parliament Acts and the convention of non-involvement in financial matters, the House of Lords is the only such check.
The Lords can publicise matters and delay action for long enough to allow public opinion to make itself felt.
Reform of the House of Lords
Composition
(a) An elected chamber.
This could be on the basis of multi-member constituencies and some form of proportional representation or on the existing first past the post system.
The obvious difficulty of having the same method of election for both Houses is that it would tend to produce a mirror image and devalue the House of Lords as a  check.
If a different method was employed there would undoubtedly be arguments as to which House better represented the wishes of the people.
(b) An appointed chamber.
The second chamber could be appointed either by the Prime Minister as under the present system for the appointment of life peers or by various interest groups who would be entitled to nominate representatives.
Concern has been expressed about extending further the Prime Minister's powers of patronage.
It could also be questioned whether a system of specialised representatives is desirable in that it may not produce a group of people willing to take an overall view of the question.
An attempt at reform was instigated in 1968 where a bill providing for a two-tier system of voting and non-voting peers was introduced.
The voting members were to be peers of first creation.
Hereditary peers were to be allowed to retain their seats, speak but not vote.
It was suggested that the number of voting peers should be about 230, that the Government of the day should always have the largest number of peers but not an absolute majority.
The balance of power should be held by cross-benchers.
The bill did not become law.
Functions
It has been suggested that the delaying power of the House of Lords should be reduced still further.
Conversely it has been argued that if the composition of the House of Lords was altered, giving it more credibility, then its powers should correspondingly be increased.
Only then would persons of the right calibre be attracted to serve in it.
In particular it has been argued that any body which has no power over financial matters is impotent as a check on the activities of government and that a new "upper chamber" should have some control over financial matters.
THE POLICE AND THE PUBLIC
THE INVESTIGATION OF OFFENCES
The police have the right to ask anyone questions in the course of their duties but, although there may be a moral duty to help the police, there is no legal duty.
(a) There is no obligation to answer questions.
(Rice v. Connolly (H.L., 1966)).
A person should not be forced to incriminate himself.
(b) Failure to answer police questions does not, by itself, amount to obstruction of the police in the execution of their duty.
(c) The police have no power to detain a person for questioning unless they have first arrested that person.
(Kenlin v. Gardner (H. C., 1967)).
Note — exceptions to this rule under Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act 1984 and the limited "detention" permitted under stop and search powers.
(d) If a person is voluntarily helping the police, that person is entitled to terminate the interview and leave at any time.
If the police wish to detain him they must place him under arrest.
Section 29 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (P. & C.E. Act) provides that he should be informed at once that he is under arrest if a decision is taken to prevent him leaving at will.
Power to stop and search
Under section I of the P. & C.E. Act the police can stop and search:(a) any person or vehicle;(b) anything which is in or on a vehicle; for stolen or prohibited articles; and may detain a person or vehicle in order to conduct such a search.
A prohibited article includes:(a) an offensive weapon;(b) an article made for, or intended to be used for, burglary, theft, theft of a motor vehicle, obtaining property by deception.
The officer must have reasonable grounds for stop and search (s.1(3)).
It must be more than a "mere suspicion." 
The Code of Practice on Stop and Search, Annex B, explains this as being a fairly strong suspicion with a concrete base that could be evaluated by an objective third person.
The reasonable grounds cannot be retrospectively provided by questioning during the period of detention.
Nor are the police entitled to rely on the fact that the suspect conforms to a general stereotype offender.
The level of suspicion thus seems to be no less than that required to effect an arrest.
The extent of the search
The Code envisages a minimal interference with a person's liberty, perhaps lasting i minute or so.
Searches are restricted to superficial  examination of outer clothing.
If a fuller search is deemed necessary, it must be done in a suitable place by an officer of the same sex and unless the suspect consents to accompany the officer, he must first be arrested.
Location of search
The power can be exercised in any place to which the public has access whether on payment or not excluding dwelling houses or other private premises such as private clubs.
It covers streets, common areas of flats, such as stairs and walkways, gardens easily accessible from the street, pub car parks, etc.
Other powers
The P. & C.E. Act does not encompass all existing stop and search powers.
Essentially it rationalised the various local acts giving power to stop and search for dangerous weapons, etc.
Other powers are given by such acts as the Firearms Act 1968 (persons, vehicles in any public place can be searched for firearms); Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (permits the police to stop and search for controlled drugs anywhere); Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 and various Wildlife Conservation Acts.
Safeguards
While it is recognised that such powers may be necessary in that they lead to a number of arrests, it must also be noted that random and discriminatory stops may be counter-productive as they may have a detrimental effect on relations between police and public.
Young people and ethnic minorities have repeatedly complained about police harassment.
Indeed initial studies showed only 17 per cent.
of stops led to an arrest.
Section 2 accordingly introduces the following safeguards:(a) The officer must identify himself (s.2(3) (a)).
(b) He must take reasonable steps to explain what he is looking for and the basis of his suspicion (s.2(3) (b)).
(c) He must normally make a record of the search there and then unless this is impracticable.
This should cover the ethnic group, identity of suspect, object, grounds of search, place and time, date and results (s.3).
This record should be made available to the suspect on request and is designed to facilitate any complaints of unjustifiable action by the police.
(d) If an unattended vehicle has been searched, a note should be left recording this fact and indicating the officer responsible (s.2(6)).
These procedural safeguards apply to most stop and search powers not simply those exercised under the P. & C.E. Act.
If the officer is satisfied with the suspect's response he need not proceed with the search.
In that case, no record need be kept.
It has been argued that the safeguards are inadequate.
(a) There is no absolute obligation to make a record.
(b) The pressures on the police may be such that they will try to avoid keeping records especially where nothing is found or they feel that no request for a copy of the record will be made.
Indeed it has been suggested that strict compliance with the provisions would impose an unwarranted burden on police time.
(c) It may be argued that a person has been stopped and searched by consent.
How genuine was that consent?(d) As the level of suspicion necessary for a stop and search is virtually indistinguishable from that required for an arrest, there may be a pressure to arrest in a wider range of circumstances.
Arrest is a more fundamental interference with the liberty of the suspect than a transient stop and search.
The effectiveness of the safeguards must, to a large extent, depend on the institutional pressure on the police to keep adequate records.
Arrest
This is a fundamental step in the criminal process designed to ensure the person is available to answer charges before a court.
It must be remembered that it is not the only way in which a person can be brought before a court.
In the case of less serious offences a person can be summonsed to appear.
What constitutes a valid arrest?
At common law, the two elements of a valid arrest are:(a) the element of compulsion;(b) the giving of the reason for the arrest.
The Act requires the person arrested to be informed that he is under arrest as soon as this is practicable.
This must be done even if the fact that he is under arrest is obvious (s.28(1) and (2)).
The suspect must also be told of the ground of arrest at the time or as soon as is practicable thereafter (s.28(3) and D.P.P.
v. Hawkins (N.C., 1988)).
This enacts in statutory form the rule laid down in Christie v. Leachinsky (H.
L., 1947) where Lord Simon said that the suspect was entitled to know on what charge or on suspicion of what crime he  was seized.
If the citizen is not so informed the police may be liable for false imprisonment unless, of course, the suspect makes this impossible by his conduct.
Lord Simon stressed that technical or precise language need not be used (see Abbassy v. Newman (C.A., 1989)).
Section 28 varies the decision in Leachinsky in that Lord Simon said that if the facts were obvious, if, for example the suspect has been caught red handed, it was not necessary to inform him why he had been arrested.
Section 28(4) now says that the person must be told the reason for the arrest even if the facts are obvious.
(Nicholas v. D.P.P.
(H.C., 1987)).
The justification for the arrest
Arrest under warrant.
Under section 1 of the Magistrates' Court Act 1980, a warrant for arrest may be issued by a magistrate on sworn information by the police.
It must identify the suspect and the offence on which it is founded.
Summary power of arrest.
In the following circumstances the police have the power to arrest without a warrant.
Arrestable offences.
Section 24 provides for a power of summary arrest in respect of arrestable offences as defined in that section.
An arrestable offence is:(1) an offence for which the sentence is fixed by law (murder, treason);(2) an offence for which a person of 21 or over may be sentenced on first conviction to imprisonment for a term of five years (This covers common law and statutory offences);(3) those offences listed in section 24(2), e.g. Theft Act 1968 (ss. 12(I) and 25(1)); Sexual Offences Act 1956 (ss.14, 22 and 23)).
These do not meet the sentencing requirement but are nevertheless deemed to be arrestable offences.
Conspiring or attempting to commit such offences, inciting, aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring the commission of such offences are also arrestable offences.
Some offences under section 24(2) already attracted a power of summary arrest under individual statutes.
The effect of making them arrestable is that it gives the police certain powers of entry and search under section 17 and 18 while investigating the offences in question.
Section 26 repeals a number of existing statutory provisions which allowed summary arrest.
Those retained are listed in Schedule 2 of the Act.
These preserved powers of arrest include offences under the  Immigration Act 1971, certain terrorist offences, squatting, and various public order offences.
The combined effect of these provisions is to give a power of summary arrest in the case of all the more serious offences and many of the most commonly committed offences, e.g. murder, manslaughter, the major offences against the person, offences under the Criminal Damage Act and almost all the Theft Act offences.
The police and the citizen may arrest:(a) Anyone who is in the act of committing an arrestable offence.
(b) Anyone whom he has reasonable grounds for suspecting to be committing such an offence.
(c) Anyone who has committed an arrestable offence or he has reasonable grounds for suspecting has committed an arrestable offence.
The police officer has additional powers of arrest.
(a) He can arrest where he has reasonable grounds for suspecting that an arrestable offence has been committed and he has reasonable grounds for suspecting the person to be guilty of the offence.
(b) He has a preventative power in that he can arrest anyone who is about to, or he has reasonable grounds to suspect is about to, commit an arrestable offence.
Where service of a summons is impracticable.
Under section 25 the police have a power of summary arrest in the case of non-arrestable offences, but only where service of a summons appears to the officer to be impracticable or inappropriate because any of the general arrest conditions noted below apply.
These are:(a) That the officer cannot discover the suspect's name or believes he has given a false name.
(Nicholas v. D. P. P. (H.C., 1987)).
(b) That there is no satisfactory address for serving the summons either because he will not give an address, or it is doubtful if he will remain at the address long enough to accept service of the summons or is unable to furnish the name of anyone who would accept service on his behalf, e.g. social worker.
(c) That the constable has reasonable grounds for believing that arrest is necessary to prevent the relevant person:(i) causing physical harm to himself or another;(ii) suffering physical injury;(iii) causing loss or damage to property;(iv) committing an offence against public decency;(v) causing an unlawful obstruction of the highway.
(d) That the constable has reasonable grounds for believing that an arrest is necessary to protect a child…
To prevent a breach of the peace.
At common law the police have long had the power to effect an arrest to prevent a breach of the peace.
Baynes v. Brewster (H.C., 1841).
This power continues.
Arrest elsewhere than at a police station
When a person is arrested away from a police station, section 30 says that he should be taken to a police station as soon as practicable unless the investigation requires his presence elsewhere.
This must normally be a designated station, that is one which has a custody officer and has the necessary facilities to cope with those detained following arrest.
He need not be taken to a designated police station if it is not anticipated he will be detained for more than six hours or where the arresting officer is without help.
Search on arrest
At common law, despite various obiter suggestions, there appeared to be no automatic right to search on arrest (Lindley v. Rutter (C.A., 1980)).
Section 32 regulates searches where an arrest is made away from a police station.
A constable has a right to search for a weapon if he has reasonable grounds for believing that the suspect might present a danger to himself or others, for example because he was acting violently or was drunk or suicidal.
The suspect may also be searched for anything he could use to effect his escape and for evidence relating to any offence if there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that the items are in the suspect's possession.
Such a search must be relatively cursory.
If a person is searched in public he cannot be required to remove anything other than his coat, jacket or gloves.
Following an arrest the police may search the premises where the suspect was immediately prior to or at the time of the arrest for evidence relating to that offence (s.32(2) (b)).
If he has been arrested for an arrestable offence, there may also be a power to search his home under section 18.
Search at the police station should not be undertaken as a matter of routine but only where justified under Lindley v. Rutter.
The custody officer does have an obligation under section 147 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 and the Code of Practice on Detention, Treatment and Questioning, to make a record of everything a person  has with him and this may, of course, necessitate a search.
Clothes and personal effects may only be seized if the custody officer:(a) believes that the person from whom they are seized may use them:(i) to cause physical injury to himself or another;(ii) to damage property;(iii) to interfere with evidence;(iv) to assist him to escape; or (b) has reasonable grounds for believing that they may be evidence relating to an offence.
Intimate searches must be authorised by an officer of at least the rank of superintendent who, under section 55, must have reasonable grounds for believing that the arrested person may have concealed on him anything which he could and might use to cause physical injury to himself or others or that he might have concealed a class A drug.
Special records must be kept of such searches and, as an added check, Chief Constables' Annual Reports must contain statistics and details of such searches.
QUESTIONING IN POLICE CUSTODY
In the past an arrest marked the end of the police investigation.
The person would have been charged immediately.
Gradually the period between arrest and charge lengthened.
Under the 1964 Judges Rules, questioning was permitted during this period and many cases were disposed of following confessions or damaging admissions by suspects after arrest.
This opportunity to question suspects in custody was clearly of crucial importance to the police.
The suspect, however, was in a very vulnerable situation.
The Confait Case (1977) illustrated how innocent suspects could be pressurised into confessing to something they had not done in the face of sophisticated techniques of interrogation and rather less sophisticated threats.
The Judges Rules provided insufficient protection.
In return for recognising the legality of the police practice of detaining suspects after arrest, but before charge, the Act attempts to give some protection to the suspect by imposing time limits on the period of detention, by introducing a system of review to ensure that detention remains necessary and by introducing a series of statutory rights supervised by the custody officer, and a Code of Practice on Detention and Questioning.
These, together with the new independent Crown Prosecution Service and the introduction of tape recording of suspects' statements, are intended to balance the  increased powers given to the police to enable them to investigate crime more effectively.
The Custody Officer
The Custody officer is responsible for safeguarding the rights of suspects at the police station.
Section 36(5) stresses his independence allowing only minimal involvement at an earlier stage of the investigation.
His main duties are:(a) To determine if the suspect's detention is valid.
If not he should be released with or without bail (s.34(1)).
(b) To determine whether there is sufficient evidence to charge him (s.37(1) and Code Para. 17).
He must not delay charging to allow questioning to continue.
(c) If the suspect is not charged the custody officer may be required to release him.
The presumption is that the suspect will be released with or without bail, but it can be rebutted if the custody officer has reasonable grounds for believing that detention without charge is necessary to secure or preserve evidence relating to the offence for which the suspect has been arrested, or to obtain such evidence by questioning him (s.37(2)).
(d) To keep the custody record which records the history of the detention (s.39(1) (b) and Para. 12 of Code).
The record is available to the suspect on request for 12 months.
(e) To ensure that the suspect is treated in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Code of Practice (see below).
(f) To itemise the suspect's property (see above).
(g) To inform the suspect of the reason for the detention, of his right to legal advice and his right to have a person informed that he is in custody and his right to consult the Codes of Practice.
The right to legal advice and to have a person informed
A person who is in police detention is entitled to consult a solicitor privately at any time (s.58).
The suspect must be told of this right both orally and in writing and will be asked to sign the custody record saying that this has been done.
The suspect also has the right to have one person informed that he is in custody.
That person may be a friend, a relative or other person known to him (s.56, para. 5 Code).
These are not absolute rights.
In the case of serious arrestable offences the rights can be postponed for up to 36 hours on the  authority of an officer of at least the rank of superintendent if that officer has reasonable grounds for believing that the exercise of either right would:(a) lead to interference with evidence connected with a serious arrestable offence;(b) lead to interference with or physical injury to other persons;(c) "tip-off" other persons suspected of a serious arrestable offence;(d) hinder the recovery of property.
Serious Arrestable Offences — Definition — section 116
1.
Some arrestable offences are so serious that they are always serious arrestable offences.
These are listed in Schedule 5 of the Act and include murder, manslaughter, rape, treason, kidnapping, causing explosions likely to endanger life or property and hijacking.
2.
Any other arrestable offence may be serious if its commission has led to or is likely to lead to:(a) serious harm to the security of the state or public order;(b) serious interference with the administration of justice or with the investigation of offences;(c) death;(d) serious injury;(e) substantial financial gain or serious financial loss.
(Loss is serious if it is serious for the person who suffers it).
This last ground has given rise to some difficulty in interpretation.
In R. v. Neil McIvor (Cr.C.
1987) the court held that the police had wrongly considered the theft of 28 dogs owned by a Hunt as a serious arrestable offence as the loss to the members of the Hunt could not be considered a serious financial loss.
In R. v. Eric Smith (Cr.C.
1987), it was felt that the police had wrongly considered a theft totalling £1,000 from a large company a serious arrestable offence.
It would not be considered a serious loss by the company and the financial gain to the robbers was not necessarily substantial.
However in R. v. Samuel (C.A. 1988), the theft of £300 from a Building Society was considered a serious arrestable offence, both because of the use of a sawn-off shot gun in the raid and also because of the accused's intention to cause serious financial loss to the Building Society.
Postponement of Rights
It is not sufficient reason for postponement of these rights either that a solicitor might advise his client to remain silent,(R. v. Neil McIvor), or a general police concern that other suspects might be  tipped off,(R. v. Eric Smith).
There must be specific suspicions that the solicitor would behave improperly.
The code says that consultation with a solicitor can be in person, in writing or by telephone.
Note the expansion of the Duty Solicitor Scheme and the provision of Free Legal Advice to facilitate this.
Even where there is an absolute right to legal advice, the suspect can be questioned before that advice is given if he consents, or where, to wait, would cause unreasonable delay or hindrance.
Solicitors may be present during the suspect's interview but the Code says that they may be asked to leave if their conduct prevents the investigating officer properly questioning the suspect.
Such an exclusion might entail the solicitor being reported to the Law Society.
Where a relative or friend of a person in custody inquires as to his whereabouts, that person should normally be told unless the detainee objects or unless any of the factors, noted above, justifying delay, apply.
The Code provides additional safeguards for juveniles, mentally handicapped persons, the deaf and those who cannot speak or understand English.
The interview
It is the responsibility of the custody officer to ensure that detainees are treated in accordance with the Act and the Codes of Practice (s.39(1)).
Indeed, under paragraph 12 of the Code, the Custody Officer has the power to decide whether the suspect can be interviewed by another officer.
In case of dispute between custody officer and investigating officer (who may often outrank him), section 39(6) provides that the matter should be referred to an officer of the rank of superintendent or above.
The Code requires that there be an adequate record of the interview, that the suspect is given refreshments and allowed periods of rest during extended questioning.
Questioning must not be oppressive.
The notes of guidance to the Code stress that the purpose of any interview is not necessarily to obtain an admission but to obtain from the suspect his explanation of the facts.
As soon as the investigating officer believes that a prosecution should be brought and there is sufficient evidence for it to succeed, questioning should cease.
There is no obligation on the suspect to answer questions.
There is nothing in the Act which interferes with the traditional right of silence.
Confessions which have been obtained as a result of oppressive questioning cannot be used as evidence in criminal proceedings (s.76).
Nor will confessions obtained as a result of anything said or done which was likely to render them unreliable, be  admissible, unless the prosecution can prove that they were not obtained in this way.
One method of ensuring fair treatment by the police during interviews is to record these.
The Act empowers the Secretary of State to make regulations requiring the tape-recording of interviews and orders have now been made in most regions requiring interviews in the interview room to be recorded.
Review of detention
An important safeguard introduced by the Act is the periodic review of detention to see if such detention is justified in terms of the detention criteria in section 37(2) noted above.
The responsibility for the reviews rests with the review officer who, under section 40(1) (b), must be an officer of at least rank of inspector and who has not been directly involved in the investigation.
Where a person has been arrested and charged, the review officer is the custody officer.
Time Limits for Review
The first review takes place not later than six hours from the time the detention was authorised.
The second review should be not later than nine hours after the first (i.e. 15 hours after the detention).
Subsequent reviews should take place every nine hours thereafter.
At 24 hours, a person not yet charged should be released.
Further detention can only be authorised in the case of a person who is suspected of having committed a serious arrestable offence.
Continued detention
Detention beyond the 24-hour period up to 36 hours can only be authorised by an officer of the rank of superintendent or above.
He must be satisfied that:(a) it is a serious arrestable offence;(b) the detention conditions apply;(c) the investigation is being conducted diligently and expeditiously.
At the 36 hour point the suspect must be charged, released or an application made for a warrant of further detention.
In the matter of an application for a warrant of further detention (H.C., 1988), the continued detention was found to be invalid as the stated reason was that the suspects might impede the arrest of others, a factor which was irrelevant in terms of section 37(2).
Warrants of further detention
Warrants authorising detention beyond 36 hours must be issued by two magistrates (s.43).
They must be satisfied that:(a) it is a serious arrestable offence;(b) the detention conditions apply;(c) the investigation is being conducted diligently and expeditiously.
The warrant can authorise further detention for periods up to 36 hours.
Further applications can be made for extensions up to a maximum of 96 hours from the commencement of the detention.
At 96 hours, the suspect must either be charged or released.
The detention clock
In calculating the time when a review is due, the starting point is:(a) where a person is arrested outside the police station (i) the time he arrives at the relevant station; or (ii) the time 24 hours after the time of his arrest, whichever is the earlier;(b) where a person attends the police station voluntarily and is subsequently arrested there the time of arrest;(c) where a person is arrested outside England and Wales:(i) the time he arrives at the first station to which he is taken in the police area in which the offence for which he has been arrested is being investigated; or (ii) 24 hours after the time of his entry into the country whichever is the earlier;(d) where a person is arrested in another part of the country and has to be taken to the police area where the offence is being investigated for questioning — the time at which he arrived at the first police station in the police area in question.
(Providing he was not first questioned for that offence in another part of the country).
(e) where a person is in police detention in one police area and his arrest is sought in another area and he is taken to that area for questioning, the relevant time is:(i) the time of his arrival at the police station in the second area,(ii) the time 24 hours after he leaves the police station in the first area, whichever is the earlier.
(Provided he was not questioned for the offence in the first police station).
The periodic nine hour reviews continue throughout the 96 hour period.
It should be noted that the act stipulates that the time limits are to be treated as approximate only.
This is not intended to undermine the safeguard they provide but to take into account the  practical difficulties of implementation.
Under section 40(4) (a) a review can be postponed if it is net practicable to carry out a review at that time.
An application for a warrant of further detention can be made up to 42 hours from the commencement of the detention clock, in a situation where the 36 hour period runs out at a time when it is not possible for a magistrate's court to sit.
If, however, it was reasonable for the police to make the application in time, the magistrates must dismiss any application made after the 36 hour point.
(See R. v. Slough If., ex p.
Stirling H.C.
1987).
The suspect or his solicitor is entitled to make representations to the reviewing officer as to why he should be released.
A decision to continue the detention must be recorded in the suspect's custody record with reasons.
Where an application for further detention is sought, the suspect must be taken before the magistrates and provided with a copy of the police information against him.
He has a right to legal aid and legal representation.
Detention after charge
Section 38(1) allows this:(I) if necessary to substantiate a name or address;(2) if the custody officer has reasonable grounds for believing this is necessary:(i) for the suspect's own protection;(ii) to prevent him from causing physical injury to any other person;(iii) to prevent loss or damage to property;(iv) to ensure his appearance in court;(v) to prevent interference with the administration of justice or with the investigation of offences;(vi) juveniles can also be detained in custody if the custody officer believes this to be in the juvenile's own interests.
Otherwise under section 46(2) the accused should be brought before a magistrate as soon as is practicable and in any event, not later than the first sitting after he has been charged.
There are detailed provisions for the arranging of special sittings if no regular court is scheduled for the day the accused is charged or the following day.
POWERS OF ENTRY AND SEARCH
Police powers to enter premises come from the following sources: 1.
Consent of the occupier.
2.
Under statutory power.
3.
By virtue of a warrant.
Consent
It is estimated that the largest proportion of searches takes place following the consent of the occupier.
In the past it has been alleged that consent was often less than genuine, the person believing that he had no option but to allow the police the right to enter the premises and search.
The Code of Practice on Searching Premises and Seizure of property recognises that consent must mean real consent.
The occupier must be told that he can refuse to allow the search and that anything seized may be used in evidence.
It provides that if consent is given, it must be in writing.
Statutory Powers of Entry
(a) To execute a warrant of arrest (s. 17(1) (a)).
To arrest for an arrestable offence (s.17(1) (b)).
To arrest for offences under the Public Order Act 1986 and the Criminal Law Act 1977 (s.17(1) (c)).
(b) To recapture a person who is unlawfully at large and whom the officer is hotly pursuing (s.17(1) (d)).
(c) To save life and limb or serious damage to property (s.17(1) (e)).
The ambit of this appears very wide.
While not a new power, it was one not greatly recognised or understood at common law.
Its enactment in statutory form might well increase its use.
(d) Although all other common law powers are abolished, section 17(6) retains the common law power of entry to deal with or prevent a breach of the peace.
(Thomas v. Sawkins (H.C., 1935)).
(e) Following the arrest of a suspect for an arrestable offence, there is a power under section 18 to search the suspect's premises for evidence relating to the offence, or some connected or similar arrestable offence.
If necessary, a police officer can search under this section before taking the suspect to the police station (s. 18(5)).
Apart from this, such a search must be authorised by an officer of the rank of inspector or above.
The phrase "similar" is likely to lead to difficulty.
(f) Section 32(2) (b), dealing with the search of anyone arrested for any offence, arrestable or otherwise, allows the police to enter and search the premises where the suspect was at the time of his arrest or immediately before for evidence relating to the offence for which he was arrested.
The search must be no more than reasonably required for the purposes of discovering such evidence and there must be reasonable grounds for believing that such evidence will be found.
This is an immediate power which must be exercised at the time of the arrest.
(R. v. Badham (1987)).
Although (e) and (f) limit the scope of the search, the effect of section 19 is to allow the police to seize other evidence of other  unconnected offences providing this is necessary to prevent evidence being destroyed.
(See below).
(g) There still exist other statutes which authorise the police and/or other officials to enter premises without a warrant.
Examples are Customs and Excise Management Act 1979, 5.84(5) which allows entry to a place where there are reasonable grounds to suspect signals or messages being sent to smugglers, various statutes relating to Customs and Excise matters, and various statutes giving powers of entry to Gas, Electricity and Trading Standards Officers, Firemen and Valuation Officers.
The precise requirements, such as the need for written authority, vary from statute to statute.
Search Warrants
There are a number of Acts of Parliament which empower a magistrate on sworn information to issue a warrant to search for such things as stolen goods, forged documents, drugs.
These powers are not fully comprehensive, and in the past the police could not, for example, obtain a warrant to search for a murder weapon or evidence of kidnapping.
An additional power is given by section 8 which allows an application to be made to a magistrate for a warrant to search for evidence of a serious arrestable offence.
Before issuing a warrant the magistrate must be satisfied that:(a) the material is likely to be on the premises.
(b) The material does not comprise matters subject to legal privilege, excluded material or special procedure material.
(c) The material is likely to be of substantial value to the investigation and is likely to be admissible in evidence.
(d) The warrant is necessary, for example, because consent could not be obtained for the search or the element of surprise is necessary.
(See s.8(3)).
Items subject to legal privilege.
This broadly relates to communications between lawyer and client either in relation to the giving of legal advice or in contemplation of legal proceedings.
In R. v. Snaresbrook Croon Court, ex p.
D.P.P.
(D.C. 1988), a legal aid application was held to be subject to legal privilege.
Items held with the intention of furthering a criminal purpose are excluded from this category.
(See R. v. Central Criminal Court, ex p.
Francis and Francis (H.C.
1988)).
Excluded material.
As defined in section 11, this includes journalistic material held in confidence and confidential personal records held by such people as doctors, social workers, etc.
No new  rights to such material are given by the Act but it does standardise the procedure for applying for a warrant to obtain such material.
Applications must be made to a circuit judge, who can issue the warrant by virtue of section 9 and Schedule 1 if he is satisfied that it would have been appropriate to issue a warrant prior to the Act.
(This is known as the first set of access conditions).
Special procedure material.
Consists of other types of confidential material which does not fall within the definition of excluded material in section 11.
It includes material held in confidence which is not classed as "personal records" and certain types of journalistic material not caught by the definition in section 13.
Access to special procedure material can only be obtained by virtue of a warrant issued by a circuit judge who can issue such a warrant either where, prior to the Act, there would have been access to such material and the first set of access conditions apply or where the judge has reasonable grounds to believe (i) a serious arrestable offence has been committed.
(ii) there is special procedure material on the premises.
(iii) the material is likely to be of substantial value to the Investigation.
(iv) other methods of obtaining the material have been, or are likely to be unsuccessful.
(v) the production of the material is in the public interest.
(The second set of access conditions).
For an example of an application of these, see R. v. Bristol Crown Court, ex p.
Bristol Press and Picture Agency Ltd.
(H. C., 1987) and Re An Application Under Section 9 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984,(N.C., 1988).
The extent of the search.
The courts have repeatedly said that the police are not entitled to conduct dragnet searches yet, prior to the Act, a series of decisions appeared to encourage the police to go far beyond the terms of the warrant.
In Chic Fashions v. Jones (C.A., 1968) Lord Denning said that the police could seize, not only the items specified in the warrant, but also anything which they reasonably believed was that item, anything which would lead to the identification of the item, any other goods stolen from the victim of the offence being investigated and anything else stolen by the suspect.
His Lordship then suggested that, subject to the test of reasonableness, the court would permit seizure of any other evidence of any crime committed by the suspect or evidence implicating anyone in the crime being investigated.
In determining whether such a seizure was  reasonable the court had to balance, on the one hand, the freedom of the individual and his rights which protected against undue invasion of his property, and on the other hand, the interests of society in ensuring that valuable evidence was not destroyed and that wrongdoers were brought to justice.
In Ghani v. Jones (C.A., 1970) Lord Denning suggested (obiter) that whatever the initial justification for the investigation, if the police happen on evidence of a totally unrelated offence, it might be reasonable to seize it, taking into account such factors as:(a) the fact that the material was the fruit of crime, the instrument by which the crime was committed or otherwise material evidence;(b) the seriousness of the crime (c) the unreasonableness of the refusal to hand over the evidence.
Section 16(8) of the Act says the search may only extend to the purpose for which the warrant is issued.
As was said by the Royal Commission, the police should not, on a warrant to search for a stolen grand piano, look under the floorboards or in the water cistern.
The Code provides that the search should be discontinued if it is clear that the goods are not on the premises unless the police have the right to continue the search under different power.
The Code also stipulates that all searches must be conducted with due consideration for the property and the privacy of the occupant, and with no more disturbance than is necessary.
Section 8(2) authorises the constable to seize and retain anything for which the search has been authorised.
However section 19 permits the constable to seize anything on the premises if he has reasonable grounds for believing either that it has been obtained in consequence of the commission of an offence or that it is evidence in relation to an offence which he is investigating or any other offence.
In either case the officer must have reasonable grounds for believing that it is necessary to seize the evidence there and then to prevent it being destroyed.
He must be on the premises lawfully, either by virtue of a warrant, under statutory authority or by consent.
This is clearly wider than the circumstances outlined by Lord Denning in Ghani where the seizure of the evidence which was totally unconnected with the investigation could be justified partly by the seriousness of the offence in question.
Lord Denning said that it had to be so serious that it was of the first importance that offenders be brought to justice.
Under the Act evidence of any offence, arrestable or otherwise, can be taken.
The Royal Commission on Police Powers would have confined this to "grave offences." 
It should be noted that material subject to legal privilege can never be seized but it appears that if the police chance upon evidence for which a warrant from a circuit judge is required, they are entitled to seize this by virtue of section 19.
Exclusion of unlawfully obtained evidence
Unlawfully obtained evidence is not automatically excluded from a criminal trial.
Instead under section 78 of the Act the courts have a power to exclude such evidence if it appears to the court that the admission of the evidence would have such an adverse effect on the fairness of the proceedings that the court ought not to admit it.
This discretion to exclude illegally obtained evidence was recognised by the common law in Kuruma, Son of Kaniu v. R. (P.C., 1955).
It was a discretion that the courts were reluctant to use.
(See, for example Jeffrey v. Black (H.C., 1978).
In R. v. Sang (H.L., 1979) it was said that evidence should not be excluded simply to show disapproval of improper police conduct.
The discretion should not be exercised to discipline the police.
That should be done elsewhere.
The judge had to ensure that the trial was fair and thus evidence should only be excluded if necessary to ensure that fairness, that is if its probative value was outweighed by its prejudicial effect.
It appears that the judge must consider the fairness of the proceedings overall, not simply the proceedings in court.
It has been argued that it covers not only fairness, in the sense of fairness to the accused, but also in the sense of ensuring that, in the eyes of the public, the highest standards of justice are upheld and it appears to the world at large that the accused is getting a fair trial.
POLICE MISCONDUCT
Remedies for unlawful arrest and detention
A basic principle of the rule of law is that any interference with the liberty of the individual must be justified by law.
Simply by virtue of his official position no police officer has the right to interfere with a person's liberty unless he can point to legal authority to justify his actions.
If a person is detained irregularly or his property or person searched without lawful authority, he has the following remedies: 1.
Self Defence.
If a person is unlawfully restrained he is entitled to use reasonable force to effect his escape (Kenlin v. Gardner (H.C., 1967)).
This remedy must be pursued with caution as the amount of force used must be no more than is reasonable in the circumstances.
If excessive it may constitute an assault (Fagan v. M. P.C. (H. C., 1968)).
This may be a very nice judgment to make in a stressful situation.
2.
An action of damages may be brought for false imprisonment.
3.
An application for a writ of habeas corpus.
The system of review of detention introduced under the P. & C.E. Act does not affect the system of applications for habeas corpus.
An ex parte application is made, supported by an affidavit.
Prior to the P. & C.E. Act applications were often made where a person had been arrested but not charged.
Such applications were often unsatisfactory as the judge, having decided that there were prima facie grounds for making the order, would adjourn the hearing to allow the police to be represented.
This had the effect of giving the police a further 24 hours to question the suspect, charge him or release him.
Clearly the procedure for review of detention introduced by the P. & C.E. Act is more satisfactory.
4.
Action of damages for trespass to the person, or trespass to goods.
5.
A person whose chattels have been seized by the police can apply for an order for delivery of the goods and damages under section 3 of the Torts (Interference with Goods) Act 1977.
6.
Complaint against the police.
It should be noted that breach of the Codes of Practice does not, of itself, render the police officer liable to any criminal or civil proceedings.
The court can, however, take such a breach into account where relevant.
Section 67(8) makes police officers liable to disciplinary proceedings for breach of the Code.
Complaints against the police
It was felt by the Royal Commission on Police Powers that criminal prosecution and investigation could only work well if the general public felt confident in the role played by the police.
Before 1976 investigation of complaints was essentially an internal police matter.
In 1976 the Police Complaints Board was established with limited functions to oversee the disciplining of police officers, who had contravened the Police Disciplinary Code but had not faced criminal charges.
They had no powers in relation to criminal actions against the police and no powers of investigation.
Despite this innovation there continued to be considerable public disquiet.
The main concerns were: 1.
A lack of independent investigation into complaints.
All complaints were investigated by the police themselves.
2.
A lack of rigour in the investigation.
A Home Office Study in 1982 found "some inquiries more concerned with establishing the criminal guilt or untrustworthiness of the complainant than with attempting to discover what happened." 
3.
A reluctance to prosecute police officers.
The D.P.P.
appeared to demand a higher standard of evidence.
4.
There was no satisfactory method of dealing with trivial complaints.
This, it was suggested, led to considerable pressure on complainants to withdraw complaints to avoid the time and effort involved in a full investigation.
A new procedure for dealing with complaints was introduced by sections 83–103 of the P. & C.E. Act.
Minor complaints
Minor complaints such as uncivility to a member of the public can be dealt with by a system of informal resolution.
The complaint is examined by a Chief Inspector in accordance with the Police (Complaints) informal Resolution Regulations 1985.
An explanation or an apology may resolve the matter.
The outcome will be recorded but the finding does not constitute a black mark on the record of the officer involved.
If the complaint turns out to be more serious or if agreement cannot be reached on a resolution, it must be referred back for a full investigation.
The system cannot be used unless:(a) the complainant consents;(b) the chief officer of police is satisfied that the case would not justify criminal or disciplinary charges being brought.
Note.Conduct which might be classed as criminal is still capable of informal resolution if it is felt that in the circumstances, the officer in question would not be charged.
Supervised complaints
The investigation of the most serious, the most controversial complaints is supervised by the Police Complaints Authority, a body consisting of a chairman appointed by the Queen and not more than 12 members appointed by the Home Secretary.
The Authority is therefore independent of the Police.
Indeed no one who is, or has been a police officer can be appointed.
The following complaints may be supervised: 1.
Mandatory Supervision (a) any complaint alleging conduct leading to death or serious injury.
Section 87(4) defines serious injury as including fracture, damage to internal organs, deep cut, impairment of bodily function;(b) any complaint alleging the commission of certain other serious offences as listed in the Police Complaints (Mandatory Referrals) Regulations 1985  and including any serious arrestable offence, assault causing actual bodily harm and corruption.
2.
Discretionary supervision The Complaints Authority can chose to supervise;(a) any other complaint which the chief officer of police thinks should be brought to the attention of the authority, whether by reason of the gravity of the allegations or other exceptional circumstance.
This may be because the complaint has political overtones;(b) the authority can call in any complaint it wishes to supervise;(c) any matter not subject to a complaint may be referred to the authority who may investigate it.
The extent of the supervision
1.
Control over the officer appointed to investigate.
2.
After consultation with the chief officer of police, the power to impose requirements in relation to the conduct of the investigation.
3.
Unless the authority is satisfied with the conduct of the investigation, no disciplinary action can be taken.
Nor can the D.P.P.
normally act.
While there is regular contact with the officer investigating the complaint, there is no participation in the investigation in the sense of being present during interviews.
At the end of the investigation a copy is sent by the investigating officer to the chief officer of police who will also receive from the Police Complaints Authority a memorandum indicating whether they are satisfied with the investigation.
Geoffrey Marshall, commenting on the bureaucracy of the system says that "it comes to a climax with an exchange of reports between practically all parties capable of exchanging them." 
The result of an unsupervised investigation will also be reported to the Chief Officer of Police.
He will then decide whether to send the papers to the D.P.P.
or whether to bring disciplinary charges against the officer in question.
The Police Complaints Authority will receive a report of the investigation and the subsequent action taken and has the power to require the papers to be sent to the D.P.P., to recommend that disciplinary charges be brought and as a last resort order these charges to be brought.
Thus even this category of complaint is subject to a measure of supervision.
The decision to refer to the D.P.P.
Prior to the Act, the Chief Officer of Police was required to submit to the D.P.P.
all cases unless satisfied that there was no criminal  conduct.
This meant that cases were sent where, clearly, the D.P.P.
would not take action.
Under section 90, the chief officer of police must refer the complaint to the D.P.P.
if he believes that a criminal offence has been committed and he believes that the officer ought to be charged.
Thus he may decide that although the investigation discloses a criminal offence, no action should be taken in the criminal courts.
He will then decide whether to prefer disciplinary charges.
As has been noted the Police Complaints Authority must be notified of this.
Disciplinary charges
1.
If the officer admits the charges, punishment will be imposed by the Chief Officer of Police and a report sent to the Police Complaints Authority.
This gives the authority the power, if it thinks fit, to refer the matter to the D.P.P.
under section 92.
2.
The Police Complaints Authority may direct that disciplinary charges are heard by a tribunal rather than by a chief officer sitting alone.
The tribunal will consist of the chief officer of police (chairman) and two members of the Police Complaints Authority who have not been concerned with the case.
The tribunal as a whole determines the question of guilt.
The chairman alone has the power to determine the nature of the punishment.
Note.
-There is a separate procedure under section 86 for dealing with complaints against senior officers above the rank of chief superintendent.
Under this section, the police authority and not the chief officer of police, has the responsibility for ensuring the complaint is investigated.
An assessment of the new system
1.
Although there is now supervision of the investigation of some complaints, the actual investigation is still by the police.
It is felt that until there is a totally independent investigation there will continue to be a lack of public confidence in the system.
2.
The ability of the Police Complaints Authority to supervise may counter the criticism that there is a lack of rigour in the investigation.
3.
The role of the D.P.P.
remains the same.
4.
The new test in section 90 for referrals to the D.P.P.
will prevent him having to consider a mass of trivial complaints where it is unlikely that criminal charges would ever be brought but there has been some concern that the chief officer of police is given a discretion whether or not to refer complaints which disclose criminal conduct to the D.P.P., although this decision is of course supervised.
5.
There is now an informal method for dealing with minor complaints.
6.
The new system is very time consuming.
This might increase the temptation on the police to do all in their power to discourage complaints.
7.
A fundamental difficulty will always remain that of substantiating the complaint.
In some respects the provisions of the P. & C.E. Act in relation to the custody record and the records kept of stop and search should make it easier for the suspect to complain.
Other abuses such as assaults tend not to take place in front of independent witnesses and proof will always be difficult.
8.
In 1989 the Home Affairs Select Committee announced that the work of the Police Complaints Authority is to come under its formal scrutiny and investigation.
PROTEST AND PUBLIC ORDER
The right to demonstrate against unpopular causes has long been considered a bulwark of liberty in any civilised society, enabling groups within that society to attempt to influence public opinion, to express their solidarity, to pressurise government and publicise their cause.
Accordingly, the constitutions of many states contain guarantees of the right of peaceful protest.
In the United Kingdom there is no such positive statement of this right, although at common law an assembly or procession is not unlawful per se, unless, for example , it causes an obstruction or constitutes a public nuisance.
There have been numerous calls for a more positive statement of the right to demonstrate peacefully, perhaps by the incorporation of Article 11 of the ECHR as part of domestic law.
However, against the background of government concern over inner-city disturbances, picket line violence, the Greenham Common demonstrations and other large scale protests, the emphasis has been on preserving order and minimising public inconvenience rather than facilitating effective protest.
The Public Order Act 1986 does not codify the law and must be seen against a background of common law.
It must also be  remembered that the fundamental duty imposed on the police is to prevent a breach of the peace.
MARCHES
The public is entitled to use the highway for passage and repassage from one place to another but the extent to which this gives an unrestricted right to hold a moving demonstration on the highway is doubtful.
In Harrison v. Duke of Rutland (H.C., 1893) it was held that a person who used the highway other than for passage could be sued for trespass.
Improper use of the highway might also constitute a nuisance leading either to criminal charges, a civil action of damages or an injunction prohibiting the continuation of the improper use.
For example, a demonstration outside a firm of estate agents was prohibited, although peaceful (Hubbard v. Pitt (H.C., 1976)).
In practice processions appear to have a favoured place providing there is no actual obstruction, that they are peaceful and that police directions are observed (see Hirst v. Chief Constable of West Yorks (C.A., 1986)).
Notice
By section 11 of the Public Order Act 1986, anyone organising a march must give the police six days notice otherwise he may commit an offence.
When a march is organised at short notice, as much notice as practicable must be given.
This is designed to ensure that the policing of the demonstration can be properly planned.
The provision has been criticised as unnecessary as most organisers liaised with the police on a voluntary basis.
The fear is that the police may have overmuch regard for public order considerations and impose such stringent conditions on holding the march as to make it ineffective as a form of protest.
It may also inhibit spontaneous protest.
Conditions
Section 12 of the Act gives the police the power to impose conditions where there is a risk of serious public disorder, to prevent serious damage to property, serious disruption to the life of the community and to prevent intimidation.
Such conditions may relate to route, size, timing, etc., of the march.
Organising or participating in a march in breach of any such condition constitutes an offence.
The power to ban
If the section 12 powers are judged insufficient and there remains a risk of serious public disorder, there is a power, under section 13, to  ban processions for any period up to three months.
The Chief Officer of Police may apply to the local authority for a banning order which must be confirmed by the Home Secretary.
It is an offence to organise, to participate in or to incite someone to participate in a banned march.
The ban is a blanket ban covering all marches or all marches of a particular class such as political marches.
This has caused some concern as peaceful demonstrators may be prevented from marching because of the threat posed by a potentially disruptive counter-demonstration.
Yet the suggestion that there should be a power to impose selective bans was rejected, neither police nor judges appearing willing to become involved in such a politically sensitive task, the exercise of which would certainly bring forth accusations of bias.
Powers at common law
In addition, at common law, the police have the power to take whatever action is necessary during a demonstration to prevent a breach of the peace.
This is something more than a mere disturbance of the public calm or quiet but it appears that in the context of public order, the element of violence deemed essential in R. v. Howell (C.A., 1982), in relation to powers of summary arrest, has not always been required.
(See R. v. The Chief Constable of Devon & Cornwall, ex p.
C.E. G. B. (C.A., 1981) where Denning M.R. said that there would be a breach of the peace whenever a person, lawfully carrying out his work, is unlawfully and physically prevented by another from doing it).
This power has been used by the police in a variety of ways; to ask demonstrators to leave the scene, even when acting peacefully.
(Dun can v. Jones (H.C., 1936)); to justify the removal of provocative emblems or banners (Humphries v. Connor (I.R., 1864)); to direct a procession en route if a breach of the peace is reasonably apprehended (Lord Scarman's Report on the Red Lion Square Disorders).
One of the most controversial uses of the power is to prevent demonstrators reaching the scene of the demonstration, a use upheld by the courts in Moss & Others v. McLachlan (H.C., 1984).
The court held that, providing the police honestly and reasonably believed there was a real risk of a breach of the peace, they were entitled to take reasonable preventative action.
What that action consisted of must depend on the imminence or immediacy of the threat to the peace.
Public Assemblies
The Public Order Act defines a public assembly as an assembly of 20 or more persons in a public place which is wholly or partly open to the air.
An organiser of any such assembly must ensure that, if it is on private property, he has the consent of the owner.
The C.E. G.B. case demonstrates that consent will not always protect against possible criminal charges being brought.
There are a number of byelaws prohibiting the holding of meetings without permission in such places as the Royal Parks, Trafalgar Square and in various open spaces in towns and villages throughout the country.
A static meeting on a highway will constitute obstruction.
(Arrowsmith v. Jenkins (H.C., 1963)).
The Public Order Act does not require notice to be given of such assemblies nor is there any power to ban.
Under section 14 the police are given a power to impose conditions on the same grounds as in the case of marches (see: Police v. Brickley, States, Kitson & Kitson (Mag.Ct 1987), where demonstrators were convicted for ignoring a condition that they should not stand immediately outside the South African Embassy).
The common law powers in relation to breach of the peace also apply.
In particular if the meeting is in private premises it should be noted that the police can insist on entering the premises even against the wishes of the organisers, if they have reasonable grounds to believe a breach of the peace is likely to occur (Thomas v. Sawkins (H.C., 1935)).
PUBLIC ORDER OFFENCES
The Public Order Act 1986 contains the following offences:
Riot (s.1)
This is the most serious of the offences in the Act, and is triable only on indictment and attracts a maximum penalty of ten years imprisonment.
 "Where I, or more persons who are present together use or threaten unlawful violence for a common purpose and the conduct of them (taken together) is such as would cause a person of reasonable firmness present at the scene to fear for his personal safety, each of the persons using unlawful violence for the common purpose is guilty of riot." 
In order to obtain a conviction, it must be shown that the accused intends to use violence or is aware that his conduct may be violent.
This form of words is used in an attempt to avoid the problem of the defence of recklessness in R. v. Caldwell (H.L., 1982).
Concern has been expressed that the ordinary principles of criminal liability will draw into the net other non-violent demonstrators who may be  considered to be assisting or encouraging the conduct in question and that unless such people leave the scene quickly they might face the serious charge of riot.
It should be noted that while 12 persons must be present who are using or threatening violence, only the person charged need be shown to have intended to use the violence.
It is unclear the extent to which the 12 need form a cohesive group.
Section 8 says that violence means any violent conduct towards persons or property.
It is unnecessary to produce a person who fears for his safety.
The test is whether a hypothetical by-stander of the requisite firmness would suffer such fear.
Violent Disorder (s.2)
This is the normal charge for serious outbreaks of public disorder.
 "Where three or more persons who are present together, use or threaten unlawful violence and the conduct of them (taken together) is such as would cause a person of reasonable firmness present at the scene to fear for his personal safety, each of the persons using or threatening violence is guilty of violent disorder." 
It should be noted that the persons present need not have a common purpose (R. v. Mahroof (C.A., 1988)); that once again it is unnecessary to produce a frightened bystander; and that unlike riot, it is sufficient to intend to threaten violence.
Affray (s.3)
This is intended to penalise fighting in that "a person is guilty of affray if he uses or threatens violence towards another and his conduct is such as would cause a person of reasonable firmness present at the scene to fear for his personal safety." 
Again no frightened by-stander need be present.
As with sections 1–2, the offence need not be committed in a public place.
However, unlike the other offences under the Act, the violence must be directed against the person and must be more than mere threatening words.
Threatening Behaviour (s.4)
This replaced section 5 of the Public Order Act 1936 which had long been the main public order offence and which had been used in a wide range of situations including demonstrations, football hooliganism, "streaking" and industrial disputes.
"A person is guilty of an offence it he (a) uses towards another person, threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour, or  (b) distributes or displays to another person any writing, sign…which is threatening, abusive or insulting…with intent to cause another to believe that immediate violence will be used…or to provoke (such) violence.
The phrase "threatening, abusive or insulting" is likely to be interpreted as under the Public Order Act 1936.
In Brutus v. Cozens (H.L., 1973) Lord Reid said that the words must be given their ordinary English meaning.
They must be more than vigorous or unmannerly.
The audience must feel threatened, abused or insulted.
Under section 6(3) a person is guilty of an offence under section 4 only if he intends his words, behaviour or writing, etc., to be threatening, abusive or insulting or is aware that it may be threatening, abusive or insulting.
The offence can be committed in public or private, but the act is drafted in such a way as to exclude domestic disputes (s.4(2)).
It should be noted that in this offence we are not dealing with the hypothetical by-stander.
The conduct must be directed to another person and it is the reactions of that other person which matter.
The speaker must take his audience as he finds it (Jordan v. Burgoyne (H.C., 1963)).
Offensive Conduct (s.5)
This is used for minor acts of disorder such as shouting and swearing which is likely to cause alarm or distress, displaying abusive or insulting slogans or throwing over dustbins and banking on doors in the common parts of blocks of flats.
It would cover those minor disturbances formerly dealt with under section 5 of the Public Order Act 1936 but also types of anti-social behaviour which have not been criminalised in the past.
A person is guilty of an offence if he (a) uses threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour, or disorderly behaviour, or (b) displays any writing sign or visible representation which is threatening, abusive or insulting, within the hearing or sight of a person likely to be caused harassment alarm or distress thereby (see D. P. P. v. Drum (H.C., 1988)).
Section 5(4) gives the police the power of summary arrest for this offence.
The imprecision of this offence has caused concern.
It is felt that it leaves the police too great a discretion as to what type of conduct is unacceptable.
In the context of a demonstration or industrial dispute, participants may well shout slogans which are abusive and are likely to cause distress to those who disagreed with the cause in question.
The Law Commission proposing the offence had confined it to  situations where the alarm or distress experienced was "substantial" but this requirement was dropped from the Act itself.
Other Public Order Offences
Sections I and 2 of the 1936 Act make:(i) the wearing of a uniform signifying association with a political organisation or with the promotion of any political objective, an offence.
For the rather wide definition of "uniform" see O'Moran v. D.P.P.
(H.C., 1975).
(ii) the organisation or training of a body whose purpose is either (a) to usurp the function of the police or the armed forces; or (b) to use or display force in an attempt to achieve a political objective, an offence.
Critique
The present law has been criticised on a number of fronts.
1.
The 1986 Act was seen by many as a missed opportunity in that it failed to state in positive terms that there was a right to protest peacefully.
2.
The 1986 Act has been criticised for being a pragmatic reaction to recent events rather than a well-considered set of rules based on clearly articulated and consistent premises about the function of the criminal law in the area of public order (see R. Card: Public Order: The New Law).
3.
It has been argued that the present law pays too great a regard to the need to preserve public order and does too little to facilitate peaceful protest, e.g. wide police powers to impose conditions to preserve the peace; the restrictions on spontaneous demonstrations.
4.
The various offences created by sections 1–5 of the 1986 Act have been criticised for imprecision.
It has been suggested that section 5 is superfluous.
5.
By rejecting the idea of selective bans, the Act has failed to deal with the problem of groups with a history of violence preventing peaceful protest by others simply by announcing their intention to counter-demonstrate.
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE POLICE
There is no national police force in Britain.
Instead there are 41 forces in England and Wales and eight in Scotland.
In London there is the Metropolitan Police and the City of London Police.
Elsewhere, the forces were based historically on the counties.
Although essentially separate and independent, they share a number of  resources including the central criminal record department, the police national computer and the national reporting centre.
There is a national pay structure and terms and conditions of employment.
The unified response of the various police forces during the Miners' Strike indicates the close level of cooperation between the various forces.
Police Authorities
The Home Secretary is the police authority for the Metropolitan Police.
Elsewhere the police authority is a committee of the County Council made up of two-thirds councillors and one-third magistrates.
There has been some controversy as to the exact role of the police authority.
The Royal Commission on the Police (1962) indicated that it was responsible for the physical well-being of the force.
It drew a distinction between this and the Chief Constable's responsibility for the direction and control of the force.
It clearly felt that the police authority should have no control over general policy or the operational side of police work.
Section 4(1) of the Police Act 1964 states that it is the duty of every police authority to secure the maintenance of an adequate and efficient police force for the area and gives it certain responsibilities in relation to the establishment, buildings and equipment.
The authority has the power to appoint the Chief Constable (subject to the Home Secretary's approval) and can require that he retires in the interests of efficiency (again with the Home Secretary's approval).
The authority must receive an annual report.
It can also order the Chief Constable to report to it on any particular matter (s.5(4)).
In recent years there has been a trend on the part of certain police authorities to move from discussing equipment, etc., to attempting to influence styles of policing and indeed to involve themselves in operational matters, for example in relation to industrial disputes and demonstrations.
This has been strongly resisted by the police and there have been a series of clashes.
The Chief Constable of Greater Manchester refused to provide his police authority with information concerning the policing of an industrial dispute on the ground that the authority did not need the information in order to carry out its functions.
The Court of Appeal stressed in R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Northumbria Police Authority (C.A., 1988) that the Chief Constable has complete operational control over his force and that the police authority has no power to intervene.
The Home Secretary
The Home Secretary performs the following functions in relation to all police forces:(a) Some degree of control over the appointment and dismissal of senior officers.
(b) He exercises financial controls through the police grant.
(c) He has control over central training.
(d) He has wide powers to make regulations governing all police officers under sections 33 and 37 of the Act.
(e) He exercises control and influence through his Inspectors of Constabulary who inspect and report on the efficiency of the various forces and who ensure that new knowledge and up to date techniques are brought to the attention of the various forces.
The Northumbria decision appears to provide the Home Secretary with additional power under the prerogative to take whatever action is reasonably necessary to preserve the peace of the realm.
This would appear to legitimise his interference in operational matters in appropriate cases.
Police Accountability
Lord Denning in R. v. Metropolitan Police Commissioner, ex p.
Blackburn (C.A., 1968), stressed that the chief officer of police should be and was independent of the executive.
Yet Lord Scarman in his report on the Brixton riots in 1981 argued that while maintaining their independence, the police must be accountable to the community.
It has been noted that there is no authority for police authorities under-taking this role.
Nor have the courts seemed willing to take on this task.
In R. v. Metropolitan Police Commissioner, ex p.
Blackburn (C.A. 1968), Lord Denning said that while chief officers of police are answerable to law, there are many fields in which they have a discretion with which the law will not interfere.
"It is for the Chief Constable…to decide in any particular case whether enquiries should be pursued or whether an arrest should be made…
It must be for him to decide on the disposition of his force and the concentration of his resources on any particular crime or area.
No court can or should give him direction upon such a matter.
He can also make policy decisions and give effect to them…"
In R. v. Chief Constable of Devon and Cornwall ex p.
C.E.G.B.
(C.A., 1981) the court refused to issue mandamus ordering the Chief Constable to assist the C.E. G.
B. in clearing a site of demonstrators who were impeding survey work for a new nuclear power station.
The court said that it could not tell the Chief Constable how he should respond to the situation as it could not judge the explosiveness of the situation at the time.
The courts have also refused to interfere with a policy direction not to enforce a particular law.
In R. v. Metropolitan Police Commissioner, ex p.
Blackburn No. 3 (C.A., 1973) it was alleged that the  Metropolitan Police Commissioner had issued an illegal policy directive in ordering his men not to enforce the provisions of the Obscene Publications Act 1959.
The court refused to issue an order of mandamus on the ground that it had not been established that such a blanket directive had been issued and that it was within his rights to deploy his forces as he wished.
Quite clearly, however, he does not have unlimited discretion.
He has a duty to enforce the law of the land.
So, for example, the courts have indicated that they would interfere if a Chief Constable decided not to take action against housebreakers in any circumstances.
(See also R. v. Oxford, ex p.
Levey (H.C., 1987)).
One response to Lord Scarman's recommendations that the police should be more accountable to the community has been the establishment of police liaison committees.
Many forces introduced these in the early 1980s and these are now mandatory under section 106 of the P. and C.E. Act.
Police authorities are required to obtain the views of the community on policing in the area.
The act does not specify what arrangements are to be made.
(It is more specific about arrangements in the Metropolitan Police District).
Police Authorities have in fact proceeded in accordance with Home Office guidelines, and committees have been established at subdivisional level with a membership drawn from representatives of the police authority, justices of the peace, and representatives of the local community.
Discussions have related to the incidence of crime in the area and the police response to it.
Although there may be discussion of specific types of offence, the committees are not empowered to discuss individual cases or deal with complaints against individual officers.
They have no power to take any action and it appears that their potential to increase the level of accountability and to develop policing by consent is minimal.
JUDICIAL REVIEW OF ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION
If an individual has suffered grievance at the hands of the administration, he may be able to obtain redress through the courts.
In addition to any statutory rights of appeal, there may be a right to invoke the inherent supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court.
This enables the Court to review the decisions of government ministers, inferior courts, tribunals and other administrative bodies to ensure that they do not act illegally, irrationally, or commit some procedural impropriety (per Lord Diplock in C. C.S. U. v. The Minister for the Civil Service (H.L., 1984).
It must be stressed that the courts are not challenging the merits of the decision but rather the power of the body in question to reach that particular decision.
THE BASIS OF INTERVENTION
Excess of Jurisdiction
Historically, the basis of the Court's intervention was the ultra vires doctrine.
If a body exercising the statutory powers went beyond the four corners of the act, then the court could intervene.
This might occur in a number of ways.
For example, the body might be exercising the wrong powers, may be taking the wrong type of decision.
In Att. -Gen. v. Fulham Corp.
(H.C., 1921) the Local Authority had power under the Baths and Wash Houses Act 1846–78 to establish baths, wash houses and open bathing places.
The court held that this did not give it the power to operate a commercial laundry.
The court must examine the nature, the objects and the scheme of the parent act and, in the light of that examination, consider what is the area over which power is given.
Any exercise of power by the authority which falls outside that area will be ultra vires.
Or there may be a requirement that before the body exercises its power, a certain state of affairs must exist as a preliminary requirement, the correct state of affairs is a prerequisite to the exercise of the power.
In White and Collins v. Minister of Health (C.A., 1939) the Local Authority had certain powers of compulsory purchase in relation to land which did not form part of private parkland.
This meant that a condition for the exercise of the power was that the land was of the appropriate type.
The court held that an attempt by the Local Authority to acquire private park/and was ultra vires.
In Daymond v. South Western Water Authority (H.
L., 1976) water authorities had a statutory power to make orders imposing charges on persons not connected to mains drainage was held to be ultra vires as the correct state of affairs did not exist as a precondition to the exercise of the power.
Then again a statute might prescribe that the power should be exercised by a named person or a person with specific qualifications.
If the power is exercised by another it may be an ultra vires act which is a nullity.
In Allingham v. The Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries (H. C., 1948) the Minister had a statutory power to give directions regarding the cultivation of land for agricultural purposes.
He had an express power to delegate this function to a committee which, in turn, attempted to further sub-delegate its functions to an executive officer who issued a directive to a farmer that only sugar should be grown in a particular field.
The farmer failed to comply with the direction and, when fined, challenged its validity alleging that the executive officer had no power to issue it.
The court quashed the conviction finding that only the Minister or the Committee had the power to issue such orders under the statute.
In R. v. DPP ex p.
Association of First Division Civil Servants (D.C., 1988) the delegation of certain functions under the Prosecution of Offences Act to non-lawyers was held to be unlawful.
(N. B. The courts will sometimes imply a power to sub-delegate into a statutory provision).
In Vine v. The National Dock Labour Board (H. L., 1957) Lord Somervell of Harrow said that in deciding whether there is such a power, two factors have to be considered:(a) the nature of the power;(b) the character of the person.
If the power is of a routine nature the courts will be more willing to imply a power to sub-delegate than if there is a strong element of discretion involved.
They have also shown themselves reluctant to allow any sub-delegation of judicial or legislative powers.
If the body exercising the power has been established especially for that purpose, the courts are likely to conclude that Parliament intended the body to act personally.
Where the power is exercised by a minister, for practical reasons, the courts are more willing to hold that he has an implied power to sub-delegate.
(Carltona v. Commissioner of Works (C.A., 1943)).
It should be noted however, that often when a minister acts through his civil servants, there is no delegation.
The civil servant is simply acting as the alter ego of the minister.
These, together with procedural irregularities (discussed below) were categorised by Lord Diplock in Anisminic v. Foreign Compensation Commission (C.A., 1968) as situations where a body might exceed its jurisdiction and so lose its legal power to act.
Abuse of power
The doctrine of ultra vires was used not simply to control the scope of the power being exercised but also to control the way the power was used.
A body may be acting within the scope of its authority at the outset but may, by the way it goes about taking the decision, go  outside the four corners of the Act.
By abusing its power, it acts in an ultra vires manner.
The basis of the control was that the courts have held that, when Parliament gives a public body statutory authority to act, it can be implied that Parliament intended it to act in a particular way; in good faith, in a reasonable manner, in accordance with the requirements of natural justice.
In Anisminic Ltd. v. Foreign Compensation Commission (N. L., 1969) Lord Reid described various ways in which a body might abuse its powers: "It may have given its decision in bad faith.
It may have failed to comply with the requirements (f natural justice.
It may have failed to deal with the questions remitted to it and decided some other question.
It may have refused to take into account something it was required to take into account or conversely it may have based its decision on something it was not entitled to take into account and so on…"
It is clear that these were not discrete categories but it is convenient to consider abuse of power under the following headings:
Irrelevant considerations
If a body acting under statutory authority takes an irrelevant consideration into account or ignores a relevant consideration then the resultant decision will be ultra vires(Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corp.
(C.A., 1948)).
In Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries (N. L., 1968) the Minister had the power to refer complaints about the operation of the Milk Marketing Board scheme to a committee.
He refused to refer a complaint of substance to the committee.
It subsequently emerged that one reason for his decision was that he had taken into account the fact that publicity about the complaint would be politically damaging for the Government at that time.
This, the court said, was an irrelevant consideration which rendered his decision unlawful.
Lord Upjohn said that unlawful behaviour might be constituted by:(a) an outright refusal to consider the relevant matter;(b) a misdirection on a point of law;(c) taking into account some wholly irrelevant or extraneous consideration;(d) wholly omitting to take into account a relevant consideration.
Essentially the court is concerned whether the decision-making body has addressed itself to all relevant factors.
It is not concerned with the question whether proper weight has been given to those factors.
(Pickwell v. Camden London B.C. (N.C., 1983)).
But where  the decision is reached on the basis of two quite separate considerations, one which is relevant and one which the authority is not entitled to take into account, the court must decide which was the dominant consideration.
If this is an irrelevant consideration then the authority's action will be ultra vires(R. v. I.L.E.A., ex p.
Westminster Council (N.C., 1986)).
Improper purpose
The courts have held that if a public body exercises its statutory power for an improper purpose they can intervene.
In Padfield's case Lord Reid pointed out that Parliament had given the Minister a discretion as to whether complaints were referred to the committee.
It was not, however, an unlimited discretion.
He argued that it could be implied that it had been given with the intention that it should be used to promote the policy and objects of the enabling act.
One difficulty is how the courts ascertain the policy of any Act of Parliament.
Rarely is this expressed in the statute.
The courts are not permitted to consult Hansard.
Lord Reid said that the courts must carry out this task by construing the Act as a whole.
Sometimes it is impossible to determine the purpose and no intervention is possible on this ground as, for example, in British Oxygen Co.
Ltd. v. Minister of Technology (H.L., 1971).
On the other hand, in Congrieve v. The Home Office (C.A., 1976) the Minister had a statutory power under the Wireless Telegraphy Act 1949 to revoke television licences.
He used this apparently unrestricted power to revoke licences purchased early to avoid an increase.
The court held that the Minister had acted ultra vires in that he had used his power for an improper purpose.
Lord Denning said that it could be implied that the Minister had been given this power to enable him to revoke licences obtained illegally.
The licences in question had not been obtained illegally.
The Minister wished to revoke them only to ensure he obtained the expected revenue from the increased cost.
The revocations were accordingly ultra vires and of no legal effect.
Bad faith
Although this has clearly been recognised as a ground of challenge for abuse of power (see Anisminic, for example), it is difficult to find examples where it stands alone as the ground for attacking the decision.
Rather it is an additional line of argument in cases where reliance is being placed on the fact that the decision is unreasonable or that irrelevant considerations have been taken into account.
See, e.g. Webb v. Minister of Housing and Local Government (C.A., 1965).
Unreasonableness
In Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corp.
(C.A., 1948) Lord Greene M.R. stated that decisions could also be challenged on the ground that they were unreasonable.
It has been pointed out that "unreasonableness" has been used in two ways in this area:(a) in an "umbrella" sense where it has been used as a synonym for abuse of power covering the various aspects of abuse of power already mentioned;(b) in a substantive sense where it means manifest unreasonableness, a decision or exercise of power that is so unreasonable that no reasonable man would agree with it.
A widely used example is that of a local authority which ruled that in no circumstances would it employ a teacher with red hair.
Unreasonableness has been used as a ground of challenge in a number of contexts:(a) To control the exercise of discretion as in the Wednesbury case.
In practice, the courts do not like to rely on unreasonableness alone but rather to base the decision on the fact that irrelevant considerations have been taken into account, etc. (see Bromley London B.C. v. GLC (H.L., 1983).
(b) To challenge the validity of delegated legislation.
Here, in extreme cases, the Courts appear willing to rely on this ground of challenge alone.
(Kruse v. Johnson (N.C., 1898)).
The Chief Justice did however stress that a by-law would not be held to be unreasonable simply because a particular judge thought that it went further than was prudent or necessary or convenient.
For a recent example of a successful challenge see R. v. H.M.
Treasury, ex p.
Smedley (C.A, 1985).
(c) Sometimes reasonableness arises in the context of a precondition before an administrative action can be taken.
For example in Secretary of State for Education and Science v. Tameside Metropolitan B.C. (H. L., 1977) the Minister had power to take over certain education functions only if satisfied that the local education authority was acting unreasonably.
The House of Lords held that the minister could only intervene if there were reasonable grounds, namely that the education authority was acting in a way no other education authority would act.
This was also the basis of the court's intervention in R. v. Secretary of State for the Environment, ex p.
Norwich C.C. (C.A., 1982).
Unpredictability of interventions
The use of the ultra vires doctrine as the basis for review posed a number of serious problems.
1.
Not all government power was derived from statute.
Some important areas of government activity were regulated by the royal prerogative hut could not be controlled by ultra vires.
2.
The development of the concept of abuse of power blurred the distinction between merits and vires.
This was particularly true, for example, where it was used to control an exercise of ministerial discretion.
3.
There was no clear theory of jurisdiction and it was impossible to draw up a set of rules which could be used to predict when the courts would intervene.
There was no real consistency of approach or even of terminology.
Take, for example, the situation where a tribunal has the power to decide a particular matter such as fair rent for a furnished dwelling house.
It fixes a rent of £6,000 per annum.
The decision may be challenged on the ground that the building in question was unfurnished.
It may also be challenged on the ground that £6,000 per annum was excessive and the rent should be only £4,000.
(a) The jurisdictional fact approach.
The courts draw a distinction between those facts which are within the tribunal's jurisdiction, i. e. those facts which the tribunal alone decides, and those facts which are outside its jurisdiction, i. e. facts which must be established as a condition precedent for the tribunal to exercise its power.
In our example the courts would classify the condition of the house, "furnished," as a jurisdictional fact.
If this is not established the tribunal would have no power to act.
If it did act, it would have made a jurisdictional error and its decision would be a nullity.
The amount of rent charged would be a matter within the jurisdiction of the tribunal, a matter on which it would have the power to err.
Other courts might not agree that the rent was fair but unless there was a right of appeal, they would not be empowered to intervene.
A major difficulty of this approach is that no foolproof method of distinguishing between jurisdictional facts and facts within jurisdiction has been developed.
It also severely restricts judicial review in that it does not allow any review for abuse of power, an essential tool in the control of unfettered discretion.
(b) The Anisminic approach.
Here it is argued that jurisdiction is conditional on its proper exercise so that even if a tribunal is entitled  to enter into the enquiry, it can lose its power by the way that power is used.
On this approach, both grounds of challenge might be possible.
Power is being exercised for an improper purpose (to regulate unfurnished property) and power is being used unreasonably (£6,000 might be argued to be excessive).
Under this approach there is no clear distinction between jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional errors.
Indeed, in Pearlman v. Harrow School Governors (C.A., 1979) Lord Denning argued that such a distinction was sterile and should be discarded.
The danger of the approach is that it allows the courts to intervene even where Parliament intended the tribunal's decision to be final.
The rationale for intervention then appears to be the degree of error.
4.
The unpredictability of intervention has laid the judges open to charges of political bias.
(Lord Denning was widely criticised after his judgment in Bromley Council v. G.L.C. (C.A., 1983).
A new approach
In Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service (H.
L., 1985), Lord Diplock put forward three grounds upon which decisions might be subject to control by judicial review.
Illegality
"The decision maker must understand correctly the law that regulates his decision-making power and must give effect to it.
Whether he has or not is, par excellence, a justiciable question to be decided, in the event of dispute, by those persons the judges, by whom the judicial power of the state is exercisable."
Irrationality
 "It applies to a decision which is so outrageous in its defiance of logic or of accepted moral standards that no sensible person who had applied his mind to the question to be decided could have arrived at it." "
Procedural impropriety
Under this heading Lord Diplock would include breach of the rules of natural justice, failure to act with procedural fairness, and failure to follow procedural rules which are expressly laid down.
Comment
Lord Diplock's approach has been widely adopted.
The following points should be borne in mind: 1.
The categories were not intended to be exhaustive.
Lord Diplock foresaw further development on a case by case basis, suggesting in particular the possible adoption of the principle of "proportionality." 
(But see R. v. Warwick Crown Ct., ex p.
Smalley (C.A., 1987 and R. v. General Medical Council, ex parte Colman (D.C., 1988)).
2.
The various grounds of "excess of jurisdiction" are clearly covered in Lord Diplock's later classification.
3.
It has been suggested that irrationality is a narrower concept than "abuse of power." 
N. B. the term irrationality has been criticised as misleading per Lord Donaldson M.R. in R. v. Devon C.C. ex p.
G. (C.A., 1988).
Review of procedural defects
1.
The court may intervene where there has been a failure to comply with express procedural requirements.
Examples are (a) consultation (R. v. Social Services Secretary, ex p.
Association of Metropolitan Authorities (N.C., 1986)).
(b) the holding of an inquiry to hear objections (Jackson Stansfield v. Butterworth (C.A., 1948)).
The effect of non-compliance with such procedural requirements depends on their importance.
In the past, requirements have been pigeon-holed as being mandatory or directory.
Failure to comply with the former will render the decision invalid.
(Agricultural Training Board v. Aylesbury Mushrooms (N.C., 1972)).
Breach of a directory procedural requirement will not affect validity (R. v. Sheer Metalcraft Ltd.
(N.C., 1948)).
However, in London and Clydeside Estates Ltd. v. Aberdeen D.C. (N.
L., 1980) Lord Hailsham criticised a too rigid distinction between mandatory and directory procedural requirements.
He said that the court was faced with a spectrum of possibilities.
At one end there were serious procedural defects which would render any decision a nullity.
Other defects were so trivial as to have no effect.
But in the middle, cases would arise where the courts had to exercise their discretion, cases where differences of degree merged almost imperceptibly into differences of kind.
2.
Natural justice
In certain circumstances the courts will imply into the decision-making process a duty to act fairly and justly in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
The common law has developed two rules which prescribe the nature of that duty: 1.
The Nemo Judex rule — no man should be a judge in his own cause.
2.
The Audi Alteram Partem rule-the right to a fair hearing.
When do the rules of natural justice apply?
Traditionally they were applied to judicial decisions taken by inferior courts and tribunals.
In the nineteen! h century they were applied to all types of administrative bodies such as public boards and local authorities and to decisions such as licensing, dismissals from office or compulsory purchase.
The width of the application of the rules can be seen in Board of Education v. Rice (N.L., 1911).
The application of the rules was, however, greatly restricted following the decision in R. v. Electricity Commissioners, ex p.
London Electricity Joint Committee Co.
Ltd.
(C.A., 1924) where a dictum of Atkin L.J.
was interpreted in such a way as to exclude the rules unless:(a) the decision being taken affected an individual's legal rights;(b) the decision was being taken by a body which had a duty to act judicially.
This encouraged the courts to draw a rigid distinction between judicial and administrative decisions.
They imposed a two-fold test that the decision must both affect a person's legal rights and also be taken by a court-like body.
So, for example, natural justice was excluded in licensing decisions (Nakkuda Ali v. Jayaratne (P.C., 1951)) as a licence was a privilege and not a right, and in the case of a board exercising a disciplinary function (ex p.
Fry (N.C., 1954)).
The case of Ridge v. Baldwin (H.L. 1964) opened up the application of the rules of natural justice to a much wider range of circumstances.
The Chief Constable of Brighton was dismissed from office by the Brighton Watch Committee without an adequate hearing.
Did natural justice apply?
The decision clearly affected the Chief Constable's legal right for no better reason than that it would affect pension rights.
It could, however, be argued that the Watch Committee was acting in an executive or administrative capacity rather than judicially.
Lord Reid, in a judgment which presaged a return to a much wider application of the rules, criticised the interpretation placed on Lord Atkin's words in the Electricity Commissioner's case.
He felt that Lord Atkin had been attempting to explain what was meant by a judicial decision but unfortunately his words had encouraged subsequent courts to concentrate on the form rather than the essence of the decision.
The two-fold test was not backed up by the authorities.
It was sufficient that the decision affected a person's rights.
The importance of the decision lies in the fact that it indicated that natural justice applied to all decisions affecting a person's rights irrespective of the form of the decision-making process or the nature  of the body entrusted with the decision.
It was left to subsequent decisions to extend the application of the rules still further to those decisions which did not affect a person's legal rights but regulated the grant of a privilege, etc.
This was done in the following ways:(a) By extending the concept of legal right.
In Nagle v. Fielden (C.A., 1966) Lord Denning applied the rules of natural justice to a refusal of a licensing application on the ground that the applicant had, by virtue of the refusal, been deprived of her right to work.
See also Denning M.R. in R. v. Barnsley M.B.C., ex p.
Hook (C.A., 1976).
(b) By applying natural justice in situations where there was "a right, an interest, a legitimate expectation of being granted a hearing" Per Denning M.R. in Schmidt v. Secretary of State for Home Affairs (C.A., 1969).
So, for example, in disciplinary hearings, natural justice has been held to apply on the ground that, as allegations have been made against a person, justice demands a right to answer these allegations.
(R. v. Hull Prison, Board of Visitors, ex p.
St. Germain (C.A., 1979)).
The courts have also been willing to apply the rules to various licensing decisions on the ground that the applicant had a legitimate expectation of being granted a hearing.
(R.v.
Gaming Board, ex p.
Benaim and Khaida (C.A., 1970)).
See also C. C.S. U. v. Minister for the Civil Service (N.L., 1985).
In McInnes v. Onslow Fane (N.C., 1978) a contrast was drawn between cases involving forfeiture of a licence,(natural justice applied as there was a right to answer any allegations which had been brought), renewal cases (where in view of the fact that a person 5 livelihood would be affected if the renewal was not granted, there is a legitimate expectation of being given a hearing), and initial applications where minimal standards of fairness apply.
Where a person is deprived of some status as a result of allegations, the courts have applied the rules on the basis that there is a legitimate expectation of a hearing.
(Stevenson v. United Road Transport Union,(C.A., 1976)).
(c) The courts will readily imply the rules of natural justice into a statutory framework.
See, e.g. Malloch v. Aberdeen Corp.
(H.L., 1971).
In what circumstances has natural justice been excluded?
1.
Policy grounds.
A restricted right to a hearing was upheld by the Court of Appeal in R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p.
Hosenball (1977).
It concerned a challenge to a deportation  order.
Lord Denning restricted the full application of the rules of natural justice on the ground of national security.
The restriction on the application of the rules to disciplinary hearings involving prisoners was removed by the St. Germain case where the hearing was conducted by the Board of Visitors.
Even disciplinary decisions taken by the prison governor could be reviewable (see Leech v. Deputy Governor of Parkhurst (N. L., 1988)).
2.
Purely administrative decisions.
In ex p.
King (C.A., 1985) Lawton L.J.
excluded judicial review on the ground that it would interfere with the exercise of a managerial function.
In Cinnamond v. British Airport Authority (C.A., 1980) Denning M.R. found that natural justice had no application to a decision to exclude six minicab drivers from Gatwick Airport.
He said "in the circumstances, they have no legitimate expectation of being heard." 
Both these cases can however be seen as policy decisions.
Lord Parker, in Re H.K. (N.C., 1967), reviewing the decision of an immigration officer said that good administration required him to act fairly.
Following this there was some suggestion that in administrative decisions there was a lower duty to act fairly.
As has been pointed out, however, In recent years it has been impossible to tell where natural justice stops and fairness begins.
The rules
1.
The Nemo Judex Rule — the rule against bias.
If the judge has a pecuniary interest in the outcome of a case then he is absolutely barred from hearing it.
There is no need to show bias.
The mere existence of the interest is sufficient to disqualify the judge — Dimes v. Grand Junction Canal (H.L., 1852).
The interest must not be too remote.
R. v. Rand (N.C., 1866).
Other non-pecuniary interests may disqualify a judge from acting, for example:(a) family relationship-Metropolitan Properties v. Lannon (C.A., 1969);(b) business connection — R. v. Sussex Justices, ex p.
McCarthy N.C., 1924);(c) judge also acting as prosecutor — ex p.
Hook.
The test of bias.
Where there is a non-pecuniary interest it is not necessary to establish actual bias but it is necessary to show that the decision has given the appearance of bias.
In Sussex Justices the court  said that "it is of fundamental importance that justice should not only be done but should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done." 
Now is the test formulated?
There are two alternative tests.
(a) Is there a real likelihood of bias?— Rand's case.
(b) Is there a reasonable suspicion of bias? -Sussex Justices case.
There has been much argument as to whether the former test is more stringent.
Most commentators agree that it is a higher hurdle to clear.
In Hannam v. Bradford Corp.
(C.A., 1970) two judges felt there was no difference between the two tests.
In Metropolitan Properties v. Lannon (C.A., 1969) Lord Denning appeared to combine the two tests.
He argued that the incident must be looked at, not through the eyes of the reviewing court, but through the eyes of a reasonable man.
If he perceives that there is a likelihood of bias, the rules of natural justice have been broken.
2.
The audi alteram partem rule-the right to a fair hearing.
It is impossible to lay down precisely the contents of this rule as this may vary depending on the circumstances and the type of function being exercised.
The minimum requirement is that the person must have an adequate opportunity of presenting his case.
(Local Government Board v. Arlidge (N.L., 1915)).
This does not mean that a person is always entitled to an oral hearing.
(R. v. Housing Appeal Tribunal (N.C., 1920)).
The courts are concerned to see that there is equality of treatment between the parties.
So, for example, the rule was broken when the court heard one side in the absence of the other.
(Errington v. Minister of Health (C.A., 1935)).
A person must also have adequate notice of any charges to be brought against him or any matters that have to be taken into account.
(Kanda v. Government of Malaya (P.C., 1962)).
The court said: "If the right to be heard is a real right which is worth anything, it must carry with it a right in the accused man to know the case which is made against him.
He must know what evidence has been given and what statements have been made affecting him, and then he must be given a fair opportunity to correct or contradict them."
A person must have a reasonable time to prepare his case.
In R. v. Thames Magistrates, ex p.
Polemis (N.C., 1974) the court held that if a person had been given insufficient time, an adjournment must be granted.
The tribunal need not always observe the strict procedures of a court of justice.
In R. v. Commissioner for Racial Equality, ex p.
Cottrell (N.C., 1980) it was said that as the function being exercised  was more administrative than judicial the attendance and cross-examination of witnesses, from whom statements had been taken, at a formal hearing was unnecessary.
Contrast this with R. v. Board of Visitors of Hull Prison, ex p.
St. Germain No. 2.
(N.C., 1979) where it was said that persons charged with serious disciplinary offences had a right to call any evidence which was likely to assist in establishing vital facts in issue, that the chairman had a discretion to refuse to call witnesses to prevent the accused calling so many witnesses as to make the system unworkable but that fairness demanded that there be a right to cross-examine witnesses.
The courts do not appear to consider that legal representation is an absolute requirement of the rule although there is a readiness to imply it if procedural rules are silent.
Lord Denning has gone further than any other judge in demonstrating a willingness to require legal representation even where this is prohibited by the procedural rules governing the body in question.
(See, e.g. Pett v. Greyhound Racing Association (C.A., 1969)).
His views were criticised by the House of Lords, for example in Pett No. 2 (H.L., 1970) and even he held in Maynard v. Osmond (C.A., 1977) that legal representation was not an absolute requirement where a police officer who was facing disciplinary charges was denied legal representation under the Police Disciplinary Regulations.
R. v. Board of Visitors of Wormwood Scrubs Prison, ex p.
Anderson (N.C., 1983) held that the Board of Visitors should have exercised their discretion to allow legal representation in view of the seriousness of the charges and the potential penalty, the need for fairness between the parties involved and the ability of the prisoners to represent themselves.
Other relevant factors might be the complexity of the case and whether any points of law were likely to arise.
See also R. v. Board of Visitors of H.M.
Prison, The Maze, ex p.
Hone [N.L., 1988].
3.
Following the GCHQ case, the courts have appeared willing to go beyond the rules of natural justice when implying procedural impropriety.
They have, for example, suggested that even where there is no express requirement to consult, such a requirement may be implied on the grounds of fairness.
In Wheeler v. Leicester City Council (N. L., 1985) following the decision of four members of Leicester Rugby Club to tour South Africa, the Local Authority, landlords of the club's ground, banned the club from using the ground for a year because they were dissatisfied with the club's response to its members' actions.
This decision was quashed by the House of Lords.
Lord Roskill said that the court should interfere because of the unfair manner in which the  council set about obtaining its objective and as such fell within Lord Diplock's ground of procedural impropriety.
Such "unfairness" may also be considered as "manifest unreasonableness" in the Wednesbury sense.
(See Lord Templeman in Wheeler).