

Defusing the Demographic Time-Bomb
Introduction and Background
It is widely accepted that the next ten years presents the Health Service with a manpower problem.
The declining number of school leavers, many of whom enter nursing, will result in an even greater shortage of students of nursing than was experienced in the late 1960s.
The fact that nurses represent approximately half of the labour force of the National Health Service underlines the size of the difficulties which lie ahead.
Already hospitals in inner city areas are experiencing staffing difficulties.
Recruits to training are dropping, particularly in the "less popular" fields of nursing.
In the view of the RCN, a manpower crisis can be averted through a combination of initiatives, some of which are already in train.
A reform of nurse education as outlined in Project 2000 would overcome many of the frustrations felt within the profession at the present time (1).
Realistic levels of remuneration and an improved clinical career structure would enable those nurses who so wished to continue the practice of nursing without loss of status to their educational and managerial colleagues.
Last, but not least, a flexible and imaginative management strategy could produce an increase in the availability of manpower.
Part I gives guidance to managers to enable them to help their organisations to react to the challenge.
It is followed by guidance on how to make the best use of existing staff.
The recruitment of a large number of Commonwealth citizens to relieve the acute shortage of labour in the health service in the late 1950s and 1960s is well documented (2).
In its evidence to the Briggs Committee in 1972, the Royal College of Nursing stated:
"Facilities to train in this country are often represented as a programme of aid to developing countries.
Recruits come expecting to be learners and find that they are labourers."
In the late 1960s there were 15,493 Commonwealth citizens  registered for various nursing courses in the UK (1).
The largest proportion were from the West Indies, Malaysia and Mauritius.
Patients in psychiatric and mental handicap hospitals were frequently cared for by"nurses' who had no training, some of whom did not even speak English.
To overcome, the manpower difficulties, some managers did introduce facilities and imaginative operational policies to ease the situation with some success.
Creches, Back to Nursing courses and Nurse Banks emerged as a means of plugging the gap.
However as the number of available school leavers began to rise, all those recruits who dropped out or left were more easily replaced.
It was apparently acceptable to society and managers that many young women would abandon their careers in spite of the costly investment.
As the number of girls leaving school rose gradually from 1970, reaching a peak 1983, the need for flexible and imaginative personnel management seemed not to matter.
Ironically during this period, the service saw a massive increase in personnel staff.
The position was well illustrated by the ENB in their publicity about the introduction of the Central Clearing House: "The majority of recruits to nursing are girls aged 18–19.
In 1981 there were 480,000 18-year-old girls: 30,000 entered nursing 6.25% In 1986 there are 400,00018-year-old girls: 25,000 have entered nursing 5.635% By 1994 there will only be 300,000 18-year-old girls: HOW MANY WILL ENTER NURSING?— In recent months, recruitment is proving to be more difficult and many of the London hospitals are experiencing severe staff shortages.
Although this is not entirely attributable to the reduction in female school leavers, it is a contributory factor which will continue into the foreseeable future.
In fact, by the year 2000 the number of school leavers will not have returned to the 1970 level and is predicted to continue to fall to an all-time low in 1993/4(2).
The few managers of nursing who were around in the late 1960s, early 1970s will not wish to relive those experiences and yet unless alternative solutions are found quickly, the problem which prevailed then will soon be upon us again.
Meeting the Challenge
Let us leave aside other relevant factors such as education, career structure, pay and conditions of service and concentrate on manpower management.
It could be argued that if a reduction in the number of 18-year-old girls leaving school is the source of the problem, then increase the proportion of leavers coming into nursing and all will be well.
If nursing already recruits 25% of leavers with between 5 "O" levels and 2 A levels, this is easier said than done, particularly when one considers that other employment agencies are also preparing to compete more aggressively to obtain their share from the pool.
For example, a parallel rise in the number of children entering schools will result in an increased need for student teachers.
Alternatively, why not turn to male school leavers to make up the difference?
Success here will require a change in social attitudes which is likely to emerge only slowly, although it should be actively pursued.
These solutions, although attractive, are not feasible.
The answer must lie in other sources of manpower provision.
While this does not necessarily require additional people it does require a determination to use more effectively those that are available (see part II).
However, other strategies can bear fruit and are described under three sections which look at Recruitment, Retention and Return.
Before examining these in detail, there is one fundamental consideration to be looked at which will have a bearing on all managerial activity; management style and attitudes.
Setting the Tone
The nurses involved in the IMS survey carried out in 1986 for the RCN gave a clear impression of what they regarded as the important features of the work situation: "good job security" , "good atmosphere" , and "doing a worthwhile job" were  cited as by far the most important.
Next, but to a much lower degree, was using personal abilities to the full".
Atmosphere, feeling worthwhile and being stretched to the full are greatly influenced by the attitudes and consequent operational politics introduced by those who manage the operation.
Managers who do not work as a team and provide support for each other and their staff cannot hope to succeed at times of staff shortage.
If the manager cannot honestly answer"yes' to the following questions, then it will be necessary to undertake some fundamental review of the manager's own attitudes and if a negative response is commonplace in the organisation, then the management team had better reappraise its style.
Do you believe that the most important resource at your disposal is the staff?
Every member of staff has strengths and weaknesses.
We should concentrate on strengths?
Every member of staff has a private life which should be respected?
When a member of staff is troubled, the organisation has a responsibility to offer help?
A manager is only as strong as the staff will enable that manager to be?
Any person who offers skills to the organisation should be given careful consideration?
There is much evidence to show that personnel management could be improved within the service and that unless the right managerial attitudes prevail, no amount of policies or procedures will compensate.
A belief in the value and importance of every staff.
member and potential recruit is a prerequisite for success in the three R's: Recruitment, Retention and Return.
Managers must recognise that the style of management which was commonplace years ago is no longer acceptable.
 "Petticoat government" and paternalism must be replaced by a supportive approach wherein each staff member is valued and trusted as a responsible adult.
The staff of any organisation are its best ambassadors or conversely may be its worst.
Their views will be coloured by their experience.
The Road to Success
The management team which has the greatest success in minimising the manpower shortage will:
recognise the worth of each nurse
seek ways of accommodating nurses special needs
demonstrate convincingly the scale of the problem to colleagues and Health Authority members
take steps to adjust operational and strategic plans learn from and match other employers' tactics
recognise the scale of the problem and take action NOW.
Finding the New
Over the past ten years recruitment of nurses has been relatively ease Neither a great deal of effort nor man hours has been dedicated to the process.
Quite clearly this will have to change.
Thus, it is not just imaginative ideas which are required but an increase in investment of management time.
Selling the organisation to prospective employees is an extremely costly business but clearly then, unless staff are available ill sufficient numbers, caring for the sick, even at present-day levels, will not be achieved.
If to this is added the ambitions for growth of services which are currently contained in every Health Authority's plans, it call be seen that the task is even greater than first imagined.
Finding new staff, i.e. those who have not nursed before, must be approached as an extensive public relations exercise which seeks to heighten the awareness of the possibilities of the health service as an attractive employment prospect throughout the community This does not apply merely to the school leaver sections of the population.
In particular the notion that nurse training is for the young and for women only must be dispelled; no mean task.
Additionally, those who do show an interest must have that interest cultivated and be made to feel wanted.
The activity falls into two main areas:
* Work within the community to stimulate interest and enquiry.
* Work within the organisation to ensure the appropriate response when the enquiry comes.
Community Relations
The first requirement is to identify staff with specific responsibility for promoting the organisation's image throughout the community.
The right person will have experience of the service, an in-depth knowledge of nursing and communication skills.
Some Health Authorities already employ a Nurse Recruitment Officer who is a member of the Nurse Education  Department but this level of commitment is completely inadequate to mount the assault which will be required ill an average health district.
The following steps will be necessary":
Gaining space in local newspapers and time on local radio.
This will require a proactive approach through the preparation of written comments and identifying issues which will be of local interest.
Being present at local events such as exhibitions, shows, sporting events.
This might take the form of health promotion/ education displays and activities in which information on careers and employment can be included.
Attending career conventions in schools and colleges of higher education in addition to cultivating a particular relationship with teachers interested in careers and vocational studies.
Influencing the attitudes of staff working in the local careers advice service by ensuring that they are provided with up-to-date information of developments in nursing and someone from whom they can seek assistance.
Keeping in touch with all local voluntary groups, clubs and local organisations in order to obtain opportunities to speak about the work of the health service and the employment opportunities.
Seeking the assistance of the local job Centre and of the nursing consultant employed by the Manpower Service Commission.
Consideration should be given to a Health Authority newsletter/paper which could be circulated freely throughout the locality.
Marketing the Organisation
Questions:
Are there sufficient staff in the organisation prepared to promote nursing in the local community?
Are staff given adequate training to enable them to undertake recruitment activities?
Is there a selection of visual aids and recruitment material available for use by staff?
Is there a staffed department within the organisation with specific responsibility for recruitment which is easily accessible to the public?
Are there plans to increase the number of staff with a particular responsibility for recruitment?
Attracting people to apply for posts in an organisation requires more than placing appealing advertisements in local news.papers, although that also is important, It requires the involvement of more than one or two members of staff with a responsibility for promoting the image of nursing.
The aim should be to equip a wide cross-section of staff with the skills, confidence and tools to take this work on.
Staff from senior management and those involved in caring for patients should be given training to assist them to make public presentations about the activity of the health service and the staff who work in it.
Public speaking is made much easier for many, and more Palatable for those on the receiving end, if it is accompanied by a visual presentation to illustrate the talk.
A selection of slides and display boards are relatively cheap to prepare and transport.
Consideration should be given to producing a recruitment video which nowadays is not an expensive venture.
These additions to the recruitment armoury will encourage more staff to participate because many can talk informally about their work, whereas a formal prepared presentation is, for some, very difficult.
Additionally the listeners will be far better entertained and have a clearer picture of the subject under discussion.
Opportunity for advertising also presents itself on receipt of a written enquiry about a job.
Nothing is more off-putting to a prospective employee than a delay in reply.
A recruiting office which is equipped with modern word-processing facilities, access to staff who are knowledgeable about the educational opportunities and the roles of nurses, a supply of leaflets, brochures and prospectuses are also an essential component of the recruitment operation, Enquiries should receive a personalised reply, almost by return of post.
Some people will wish to enquire in person and to speak to someone who can answer their questions.
The recruiting office should advertise the fact that it welcomes members of the public who wish to drop in.
For the majority of the public the health service is only accessible for the purpose of treatment.
Access for other purposes is less well signposted.
Brochures and leaflets, can be circulated widely to locations frequented by potential recruits.
Youth Clubs and school libraries are particularly important and should therefore be liberally supplied with material to keep the health service as a prospective career avenue in the forefront at all times.
Attendance at the careers convention once each year is not enough and will in any case only reach a small proportion of the school children who may be contemplating their future.
Action:
Identify and train staff from a wide range of backgrounds and ages who would be prepared to participate in recruitment activities.
Produce a series of recruitment aids, ranging from videos to leaflets.
Establish a Recruitment Office which is staffed fully and equipped to allow a swift response to enquiries on a written and personal basis.
Circulate brochures and leaflets to all locations which are frequented by potential recruits.
Provide selected staff with "media" training.
Nursing Is for Everyone
Questions:
Have specific steps been taken to attract men and "mature" women to nurse training?
Does the health authority apply unnecessary restrictions on potential recruits to nurse training?
Does the health authority have any provision to assist young people to acquire the necessary academic qualifications for entry to nurse training?
Of the 60,000 nurses who were in training in 1986, less than 10,000 were over the age of twenty-six.
The number of men as a proportion of the whole is very small.
Clearly there is room to increase these numbers by emphasising that nurse training is not only for young women.
The belief that if you are over twenty-five you are too old is commonly held.
These problems are national and should be addressed centrally but efforts could also be made locally.
A health authority should seek out a group of "mature" female nurses and a group of male nurses who are in training and prepare them for the purpose of dispelling those commonly held misconceptions.
The authority should advertise the fact that it is prepared to give talks and attend events which are directed at appealing to these groups.
Attending conferences and meetings of women's organisations or asking to address groups of boys will provide an opportunity for frank discussion which in the case of boys is very inhibited in the presence of their female counterparts.
Nursing is still an occupation that few boys ever consider; this fact must be addressed.
Coping with nurse training after marriage and childbearing can obviously be difficult in some circumstances but may be delayed  until children are more independent.
A nurse who trains at the age of forty still has many years of valuable service ahead and many years of past experience to draw upon.
Why then in 1986 were there only about 1,000 females over the age of forty in training?
Some training schools do apply age limits, which contributes to the common misconceptions about age restriction.
Discriminating on the basis of age alone is not acceptable.
One health authority has developed a"Mature Entrants Course for older women wishing to commence training (1).
Follow-up of these students shows that they tend to remain in nursing much longer that the younger applicants.
The fact that most of them have already had their family by the time they commence the course is the most likely explanation.
A course available specifically designed for their needs at which they will meet others of their own age is an added incentive.
Many who would like to enter nursing and believe they are too old are put off by the knowledge that even if they do venture, they will find themselves alone in the company of a large group of teenagers.
Some health authorities provide part-time training courses which widens the appeal to some women who still have other commitments.
Nursing, as stated earlier, recruits approximately 6% of all 18-year-old school leavers.
The majority of these will have obtained the required 5 "O" levels whilst at school.
Not all 18-year-olds wish to enter nursing but many who do are unable to meet the academic requirements.
Research carried out in 1985 showed that 44% of Chief Nursing Officers did not have 5 "O" levels yet presumably they had coped with the rigours of a career in nursing at all levels (2).
Furthermore, many young people do not reach their full academic potential by the time they leave school.
This presents an opportunity for health authorities to promote opportunities to assist school leavers who wish to nurse to gain the entry requirements through cooperative ventures with local colleges of further education.
This investment would assure further recruitment successes by enlarging the pool of young people from which students could be obtained.
Action:
Identify groups of male nurses and "mature" female nurses prepared to participate in recruitment activity.
Seek out opportunities to publicise nursing to men and "mature" women.
Review criteria for consideration of applications for nurse training.
Establish training courses for mature entrants.
Establish courses to enable young people to meet the entry requirements for nursing.
Strengths not Weaknesses
Questions:
Does the organisation seek to publicise beneficial aspects of working in the health service?
Does recruitment material contain information about benefits and staff facilities?
Much of the publicity given to the health service concentrates on the "bad" news.
How much do we seek to emphasise the advantages, strengths and benefits of employment in nursing.
Believe it or not, many nurses enjoy the work and would not wish to change their occupation.
Presumably our recruiters will try to convey this, but written adverts, brochures and other media should seek to emphasise the benefits of which the following is a sample:
*Most nurses work in a pleasant environment.
* The majority of colleagues are people who care about others.
* The work is varied and therefore free of monotonous routine.
* Every — patient is different and a new experience.
* Seeing people getting well or overcoming disability is very satisfying.
* There are many different branches of nursing which are available after qualifying.
* Prospects for advancement and further development are good.
The facilities provided in many health authorities will be unknown to the outsider and should be publicised.
Libraries should be well-equipped and accessible.
The younger generation is used to Computer Assisted Learning and other modern technology which is an adjunct to learning.
Many authorities provide extensive occupational health facilities which are not available in all employment situations.
The provision of free uniform, laundering and changing facilities is a benefit — Transport and arrangements to protect staff can also be emphasised.
Action:
Provide staff involved in recruitment with a checklist of details of benefits and facilities which they can incorporate into their talks.
Review the standard of library facilities.
Review the provision of occupational health services.
Consider the benefits of introducing a health authority transport service.
Recruitment Is Everybody's Business
Questions:
Are the staff who come into direct contact with the public given training in"customer relations'?
Are there opportunities for the public to see the health services at work?
Are there departmental placements for young people from schools?
Have events been organised to raise awareness among all staff of the recruitment problem ahead?
So far this section has considered activity specifically designed to attract newcomers to the organisation.
Perhaps the best form of advertising is that which goes on all the time through everyday contact with users of the service.
At some time in their lives, almost all have cause to visit the local health centre or hospital where they see and meet staff at work.
What they observe and how they are received will have a great impact on how they perceive the service and those who work within it.
Many new recruits have been influenced by their experiences during a hospital stay or visit.
How many have been influenced not to enter nursing?
All staff who have contact with the public should be given training in customer relations.
Telephonists, receptionists, porters as well as professional staff are the people who create the public image of the local service.
A friendly, welcoming representative is undoubtedly a further aid to recruitment and it costs very little.
Apart from access for treatment, members of the public should be encouraged to come into health service premises to see firsthand the work and the facilities.
Open days and exhibitions with different themes should be organised in conjunction with the League of Friends and, when appropriate, with local interest groups.
Again, advertising material should be liberally available.
Opportunities for school children to spend periods in various departments as part of their social studies or community  placement should be encouraged.
Staff in all departments should be involved in schemes which provide opportunities for firsthand experience of work in the health service.
Youth Training Schemes are well advanced in some places but more could be done.
From this it can be seen that recruitment will be most effective if everyone is involved and understands the problem.
Herein lies a big problem for managers who must take steps to ensure that everyone understands the need for involvement — To this end a series of seminars and talks should be arranged in order to explain the issue, seek ideas and the commitment of everyone to meeting the challenge.
Action:
Organise in-service training for staff on customer relations.
Organise seminars and educational events to raise the awareness and seek the involvement of all staff in recruitment activity.
Identify placements which can be made available to school children in order that they can gain a firsthand view of the health service.
Organise open days and exhibitions to encourage the involvement of the local community with health matters.
Summary
Presenting nursing and the local health authority as an occupation and prospective employer worthy of consideration requires considerable investment in people, materials, time and management effort.
However, without this commitment, fishing in an ever diminishing pool is unlikely to be very rewarding.
This amount of effort will require the allocation of finance with a high priority in operational plans.
To expect existing staff to contribute to an extensive public relations exercise without adequate support of staff, training or materials is unrealistic.
Retaining the Working
The loss of nurses is so great that the profession replaces itself numerically once every six years.
Over a third of all nurses who enter training never join the register.
Quite clearly, a small percentage reduction in wastage would go a long way to easing the manpower problems.
In general, this must be achieved by taking account of the special needs of women who work and of those who are in training.
The reform of nurse education which will follow Project 2000 will take care of some of the reasons which cause student wastage.
Failure to proceed with the nursing reforms will have catastrophic consequences.
By necessity changes will take many years to enact a, id consequently the present system will prevail for some time.
Even if there were no reform of nurse education, a manpower shortage is inevitable and must therefore be addressed.
Many women who work have other responsibilities which must be harmonised with the responsibility to their employer.
Some are the head of the family with husband and children dependent on their salary some are single parents and some rely on their income to provide for the shortfall in their partner's earnings.
For these people, work is essential and must be retained at all costs.
Obstacles or hindrances to combining both responsibilities will lead to a search for an alternative solution.
The desire to continue to nurse may have to be subjugated to the need to work at something which enables the other responsibilities to be satisfied.
Some women work because, having reduced responsibilities and ties, they have more spare time and freedom.
Apart from their requirement to be helped to return and redevelop a career which will be considered later their needs are little different from other employees.
Nurses in Training
Questions:
Do nurse teachers take time out to discuss their  teaching methods with their peers?
Are there arrangements for providing students with support with regard to personal problems?
Does the allocation plan ensure that learners' holidays are known well in advance?
Is the education department closed on public holidays?
Are there staff identified with specific responsibility for a student welfare service?
Is there adequate accommodation for nurses in training?
Is there a guarantee of a period of employment following training?
One correspondent to the nursing press wrote "Everybody knows that brutalised individuals reproduce brutal behaviour." 
She was writing about nurse teachers!
This may have been an exaggeration based on her own experience, but was related to the attitudes and difficulties with which she had to contend during training.
Teachers, like managers, need to review their attitudes, especially as the majority will themselves have come through the nursing system"which will have shaped their values and behaviour.
Nurses in training who work hard physically, study in their own time and have numerous personal commitments are under pressure.
An inconsiderate attitude from a teacher or manager may be the "last straw" .
Consideration for their emotional and physical pressures is essential, as well as a positive means of offering support if necessary.
Someone in the occupational health department or specific tutors should be given responsibility for student welfare and be trained as counsellors.
Everyone needs to be able to integrate work with personal life.
This requires adequate notification of holiday arrangements.
An allocation plan should be given to each student at the commencement of training, setting out the holiday periods.
This should include public holidays which may be a very valuable time for many families.
It is recognised that nurses must care for patients during recognised holidays but they should not be expected to be in the classroom.
Much attention has been given in recent months to the provision of accommodation for nurses.
Many entrants to nursing will be leaving home for the first time or changing their location.
Accommodation should therefore be available both to assist them in the personal adjustments they will have to make and to ensure that at the outset they are suitably accommodated.
In their first few months of training, they can give consideration to making their own arrangements if they so choose.
For many nurses in training, their contract of employment ends on completion of training.
Not only does this not provide for a period of professional consolidation, but the students additionally have concern for their continuing employment.
Unless they can be guaranteed a post, they will consider alternatives at a time when they probably need to be free of distractions from their studies and may commit themselves to another job unnecessarily.
In the interest of the student and the employee, this situation call easily be remedied at the outset by offering all new trainees a contract which extends six months beyond the due date of completion of training.
Action:
Opportunities for peer review among teachers of nurses should be a regular feature of the Department of Nurse Education.
Staff with particular responsibility for the welfare of nurses in training should be identified.
Staff with responsibility for student welfare should be given training to acquire counselling skills.
At the commencement of training, each trainee should be provided with a training plan which includes details of holiday allocation.
Review the adequacy and suitability of accommodation for trainee nurses.
Nurses in training should be given a guarantee of employment following qualification.
The Needs of Women
Guidance here is concerned primarily with suggestions for meeting the needs of women who are coping with other responsibilities in addition to being in employment.
Travel to Work
Questions:
Does management have a profile of the localities from which staff travel to work with an indication of the numbers using public transport?
Do the public transport services adequately serve the residential areas of nurses, bearing in mind shift arrangements?
Are there localities which may be a source of recruitment if transport were available?
Although owning a car is common today, it must not be assumed that all nurses can provide their own transport.
Many families have only one car which may have to be reserved for the use of the nurse's spouse and others have no car at all.
Public transport may be the only option and is therefore of concern to management.
A liaison should be established with the local bus company to ensure that those who plan timetables and routes are fully aware of the health authority's working arrangements, needs and plans for future developments.
Where problems do exist, then attempts should be made to seek adjustments to transport arrangements.
In situations where public transport arrangements cannot be adjusted to suit the needs of the staff, then it might be worth considering the provision of health authority transport, especially during the hours when public services are greatly reduced.
Travelling late in the evening has become a very real worry for many nurses, as the incidence of violence rises.
The availability of transport which departs from the hospital will be seen as a valuable bonus by many staff.
In some areas there may be centres of population which are very poorly served by public services.
The provision of transport may uncover an untapped source of recruitment not previously available.
Action:
The manpower database for each health authority should be able to provide data on the number of staff residing in each location of the staff catchment area.
Information on the home addresses of nursing personnel should be utilised to determine the numbers travelling from each of the centres of population in the catchment area.
Public transport timetables should be examined to estimate their adequacy for staff travel in the light of the knowledge gained on where staff are domiciled and the early and late evening shift changes.
Local transport agencies should be asked to consider changes in timetabling or re-routing where this might be to the benefit of staff.
Consideration should be given to the provision of health authority transport where no suitable alternatives are available.
Children
Questions:
Is there an understanding among managers of the implications of employing nurses with responsibility for young children?
Are there facilities to assist nurses with young children to work?
The difficulties which arise through employment of staff with responsibility for young children should be recognised from the outset.
Parents faced with the choice of caring from their offspring or coming to work would be expected to choose the former.
Inevitably occasions will arise when this choice faces all working nurses who have young children.
This fact is known to managers and should therefore not come as a surprise each time it arises.
The decision to offer a post should be based on the candidate's suitability to undertake the role on offer and not on the domestic circumstances which prevail.
In the past many health authorities discriminated unfairly by not employing those who may have had domestic responsibilities.
This negative approach serves only to deny the health authority some service from potential employees.
At the time of presenting themselves for employment, many nurses/mothers may not have experienced any difficulties with their children's health or may not have foreseen the possible difficulties.
When children start school, they often develop all kinds of minor illnesses as they first become exposed to a large community; a fact the nurse seeking her first employment after the birth of her child may not know.
She may hold the view that she has made provision for every eventuality and is therefore unlikely to experience any difficulties in combining work with parenthood.
Whatever the circumstances an open and frank discussion must take place between the new employee and her manager at the earliest opportunity.
The nurse needs both to understand the difficulties which managers experience in staffing the service and to know that managers understand the nurse's difficulty of combining a working life with parenthood.
The aim should be to create an understanding between the two parties which will ensure an  openness and willingness to deal honestly with situations when they arise.
Focus on the following questions will open the discussion:
Have you someone who can assist and support you with the children?
What provision could you make if the child suddenly becomes ill?
What provision have you made for school holidays?
Who will care for the children when you are at work after school hours?
Will the children be left alone at night?
Have you considered working on the Nurses Bank?
A discussion centred on these questions will enable the nurse to think through the possible difficulties.
It will have to be made clear that although understanding will be forthcoming as inevitable emergencies arise, in the final analysis she will generally be expected to meet the requirements of the contract of employment.
At the end of the day, she should be satisfied with her undertaking and the manager acknowledge the likely consequences.
Through the process described above, both parties will have a detailed understanding of the needs of each other and as a bonus, management will have displayed itself as a caring, approachable employer.
The nurse will know that her situation will present conflict from time to time, but that this is recognised.
In turn, this is likely to produce a commitment from her to do the utmost to meet her obligations to the job.
Nursery and Child-Minding Facilities
Many parents have no-one who can care for their young children, whether they are of preschool age or just require supervision during school holidays.
The provision of a nursery and a child-minding service which operates during school holidays may enable a number of nurses to return to work earlier than would otherwise be possible.
Additionally, the need for those with small children to take all their leave during school holidays would be reduced, thus easing the management difficulties associated with peak holiday periods.
A creche is a costly facility because of the requirement to meet the strict regulations.
An attempt should be made to quantify the likely usage through enquiry of those who attend back-to-nursing courses and through local advertisements which seek information from those who would consider coming back to nursing if a child-minding service was provided.
Additionally nurses already on the staff should be surveyed.
Although initially there may be a financial deficit, a value must be placed on the services of a qualified nurse when considering a scheme's viability.
Action:
Managers should develop a positive approach to employing nurses with responsibility for young children.
Exploration of the implications of family commitments on employment should be fully discussed after the offer of a post is made.
Nursery and child-minding facilities should be introduced if there appears to be a level of demand which would make it cost-effective.
Coping with Crisis
Questions:
Does the authority have a sympathetic approach to those who require additional time off for domestic reasons?
Can staff arrange for others to work for them at times of crisis?
The employment of women with small children or dependent relatives will inevitably give rise to situations which interfere with the nurse's attendance at work.
Bemoaning the difficulty is no solution, even though lack of attendance will be to the inconvenience of both parties.
An opportunity to discuss the difficulty over the telephone when it arises and to look for a means of reducing the effects of the crisis is the starting point.
Remember that the nurse will usually feel embarrassed by the inconvenience caused and wish to minimise it as much as possible.
She should be given the opportunity to provide her own solution.
The manager who seeks to increase the nurse's embarrassment or difficulties is of little help.
There may be no alternative to leave-of-absence or annual leave but the nurse should be given the opportunity to resolve her difficulty by seeking the help of colleagues who may be prepared to substitute for her at short notice.
She may be able to work different hours for a period of time while her burden is shared by another member of the family or a neighbour.
These alternatives will not always be available at short notice but it might be possible to plan for them.
The crisis itself is not predictable but that one will arise sooner or later is a good reason for introducing a "crisis-sharing" scheme.
Nurses are invited to make it known that for one reason or another they may encounter difficulties in attending for work as scheduled.
Small groups, say three or four, agree among then, selves that they will try to cover for each other when one of  the group has a problem.
The nurse in trouble knows she has colleagues who expect to help out and she can provide the solution for herself and the employer.
Management has prior knowledge of the groupings and has agreed to accept short-term substitution when they arise.
At times of family illness, the crisis may extend beyond a few days.
There may be no alternative to leave of absence, even though the nurse can ill afford the loss of income.
She may seek to use some of her annual leave entitlement as an alternative to unpaid leave.
A compromise of allowing her to reduce her scheduled hours and time of working should be offered, thus providing some income and retaining her entitlement to annual leave when it will be of personal benefit to her.
Recurrent problems may be symptomatic of crises which the nurse cannot or does not wish to share with her manager.
Managers should in these cases refer the nurse to the occupational health department which may provide support and advice with consequent benefit to all concerned.
Only when these avenues have been exhausted should the manager discuss the possibility of sanctions which may have to be imposed if attendance does not improve.
Action:
Having identified staff with dependent relatives and small children, devise methods which will enable them to invite other nurses to substitute for them when crises arise.
The occupational health department should be used as a resource to those nurses who it is suspected may have a health or social problem.
Temporary reduction in working hours should be a recognised means of enabling staff to cope with longer term difficulties.
Health and Support
Questions:
Does the health authority have an occupational health service which is readily accessible to all nurses?
Does the health authority employ a qualified occupational health team with well-developed counselling skills?
Nurses, like any other member of society, have their share of health and social problems which they wrestle with, often unknown to anyone.
When these come to the attention of  colleagues, there is an obligation to point the nurse in the right direction for help.
Frequently however these problems go unnoticed or are hidden from view Only the nurse herself is aware of the difficulty.
For this reason, access to help must be clearly visible and advertised so that the needy recognise a possible source of relief.
The role of the occupational health department is not only to provide a service to those who are unwell but to assist the employer to gain the maximum benefit from the labour force by maintaining and promoting health among staff, thus reducing absence.
Social and psychological burdens can be just as incapacitating as physical ill health.
Occupational health staff who are skilled counsellors can do much to alleviate a problem and direct those in need to other agencies when appropriate.
The large proportion of women employed in nursing increases the importance of occupational health services, for invariably the nurse will be shouldering responsibilities for others which adds to the likelihood of pressures outside work.
Action:
Ensure the provision of an occupational health service to all employees within the health authority.
Enable occupational health staff to obtain and update their counselling skills.
Publicise the occupational health service within the organisation, highlighting the supportive features of the services.
Job-Sharing and Flexible Working
Although staff may have been appointed to a post With fixed hours and work schedules, a change in circumstances may give rise to a request for change.
Job-sharing or flexible working may be an option which will enable the nurse to remain in employment.
These arrangements are described in part II (see pages 52 and 42).
Bringing Back the Lost
In numerical terms, the nursing workforce renews itself every six years which results in a large population of nurses who are not practising within the NHS.
Some leave for work in the "private" sector but the majority are uninterested for one reason or another or leave to have children.
The first group continue to contribute to the health care of the nation but the second and third are a target for re-employment at some time.
Somehow they must be found, have their interest in nursing maintained and be given opportunities to return to work under conditions which suit their circumstances.
Questions:
Have efforts been made to identify nurses in the locality who are not employed as nurses?
Has consideration been given to ways of keeping in touch with nurses who leave?
Has consideration been given to the publication of a  news-sheet targeted at nurses residing locally?
Has consideration been given to producing a programme of events open to all nurses who are not practising?
Finding the potential source of recruits for the future is not an easy task.
A variety of approaches should be adopted to build a profile of nurses resident locally.
This then becomes the basis for mailing and contacting those who are no longer nursing.
The last national census which took place in 1981 provides information about the occupation of those residing in each locality.
Additionally, health authority records and exit interviews should be used to identify nurses who have left employment and who may still reside nearby.
Advertisements should be placed in local newspapers and other public places seeking contact from nurses who are not in employment.
Over time, a comprehensive mailing list of nurses can be constructed, all of whom are potential recruits.
A nurse may contact the health authority when she has decided to return to work.
However, she may decide to seek alternative employment due to ignorance, apprehension or lack of confidence in her own ability to return after a break in service.
Unless she sees a local advertisement, she will have little knowledge of job opportunity and if she has moved into the district from elsewhere, she may have difficulty in assessing the employment prospects.
A  news-sheet targeted at unemployed nurses and distributed free of charge can be used as a vehicle for publicising vacancies, educational events and the work facilities currently available.
Developments in nursing practice and local innovations are a source of interest which can be included.
Information for those who wish to return, for those who may return at some future date, and those who just wish to be kept abreast of developments should be incorporated.
Production of the  news-sheet should be the responsibility of a named person in the Personnel Department who is also the point of contact for all enquiries.
Liaison with the department of nurse education and clinical nurse managers should provide a source of clinical material.
Help from existing staff should also be sought in publicising the availability of the  news-sheet .
Particular effort should be made to keep in touch with nurses who have left employment and who may be able to return at some future date.
At least once each year they should be invited to an event which permits them to keep abreast of both general and particular developments in their field of interest.
A core programme, coupled with an opportunity to spend some time in the patient area of their choice, is most likely to meet the needs of the individual.
Back to nursing events are not new but are a valuable means of locating nurses and interesting them in current health issues.
The emphasis should be on informing and maintaining professional interest.
The opportunities can be made known but too much pressure on recruitment will dissuade attendance.
When domestic and other circumstances permit, the nurse will find reentry much less problematical due to her professional knowledge and familiarity with the organisation.
Programmes should be arranged at times to suit those who are likely to attend and should be organised and tutored by the Continuing Education Department.
A programme of lectures, seminars and visits over a period of time is most likely to meet that need.
Consideration should be given to charging a small fee as this has been shown to aid attendance.
During the course of the year a number of events are staged for nurses currently in employment.
Consideration should be given to extending an invitation to those on the mailing list.
In addition to the knowledge of the subject, the nurse will gain the opportunity to meet others who are currently practising and therefore have first-hand knowledge.
Action:
Compile a mailing list of nurses residing in the district who are currently not in the employment of the health authority.
Identify a member of staff with responsibility for producing a newsletter and acting as the point of contact for those on the mailing list.
Identify a teacher in the Continuing Education Department with responsibility for arranging and coordinating the events aimed at keeping nurses in touch.
Conclusion
Part I should help managers to counteract the effects of the demographic changes in the population and increase the competitiveness of health authorities in the labour market.
To date, many health authorities have no difficulty in recruitment but the overall position shows a declining number of nurses in training and a reduced output of qualified staff.
Already the position in the Capital is giving cause for great concern.
The number of 18-year-olds will continue to decline for many years to come, so it will require an unprecedented management initiative to offset the effects of staffing levels if services are to be maintained, never mind increased, to meet the aspirations of the current strategic plans.
There is nothing new in these guidelines, but there is evidence that few authorities are giving the issue the attention it warrants.
It is not an overstatement to say that a crisis is imminent and can only be averted if action is taken by all concerned as a matter of extreme urgency.
Guidelines for Managers in the Deployment of Staff
Introduction and Background
The provision of a labour force to ensure that care is delivered when required is a many-faceted activity.
Most considerations have concentrated on certain aspects and left others to the imagination.
The best system for measuring patient workload will be of little value if the workforce is either not available at the time required or without the necessary skills.
Thus, the assessment of need must be coupled with consideration of recruitment practices, training and staff management systems which take account of both daily and weekly distribution and allow for peaks and troughs throughout the year arising from annual leave and training activity.
Some facets are predictable and, therefore, controllable.
Those which are not entirely predictable, contrary to common belief, can be managed.
The use of a nurse workforce is not solely the concern of those who manage nurses.
Decisions taken by other disciplines may have a costly impact over which the nurse manager is powerless to intervene; the general manager's control of ward clerks, the contents of contracts agreed before privatisation or the consultant surgeon's annual leave arrangements are examples.
Decision-making is not confined to managers holding the most senior positions.
Managers at all levels may contribute decisions which affect the use of nurses.
For example, the director of nursing may devise the system for allocating annual leave but the ward sister may determine who will actually be given holiday at any particular time.
The guidance gives an insight into the respective contribution of staff at ward, unit and health authority level.
In July 1985 the Comptroller and Auditor General's Report was published and it concluded that there were weaknesses in the control and deployment of nursing staff.
(1) A 9% increase, in real  terms, in the number of nurses employed in England between 1976 and 1983 was the justification for the National Audit Office Enquiry.
In the same month the Secretary of State announced a Review of Nursing Skill Mix in certain specialties, under the direction of the Chief Nursing Officer of the DHSS.
The study was to be a descriptive one which might identify where further work was required.
The report was published in July 1986 and concluded that apparently there had been little work done on the effects of skill mix on patient services and that"a higher priority should be given by management to achieving the best value for money by the adoption of methods of allocating staffing resources more closely related to the needs of patients and ward objectives.
(I)
In its report, Control of Nursing Manpower, published in February 1986, the Committee of Public Accounts acknowledged that progress had been made by nurse managers but went on to recommend that the "DHSS should ensure that all general managers are made aware of all the possibilities for economies identified in the C & AG's report" (2).
(The RCN submitted a paper to the Committee, which is reproduced in full in the Report.)
With this "backcloth of evidence" , it was no surprise that the Personnel Director of the Management Board of the DHSS asked regional general managers to discuss the issues with regional nursing officers and district colleagues.
The letter drew attention to particular aspects of all three reports previously referred to and stated that there was "a need for a specific managerial and professional initiative to improve the performance of this function" .
As a further contribution to the debate the RCN has produced this document which provides broad lines of guidance which could be of assistance to nurse managers.
It is hoped that it will be read by all who have an interest in the delivery of nursing care to patients but it is written to help those who manage nurses.
Decisions Related to Manpower
Those who make decisions which affect the use of manpower are found at all levels in the service.
They each have a significant contribution to make and in the main are dependent upon each other for an effective outcome.
In  practice many senior nurses have failed to take account of the ward manager's contribution, although she has responsibility for directing the efforts of the labour force towards meeting patient needs.
The decisions vary in type from those which are strategic in nature, those which maintain the status quo and those which occur almost by default.
One commentator describes them as key, routine and decisionless decisions.
(I)
Key Decisions
Key, or strategic, decisions set or change the direction of an organisation.
They are usually "top down" decisions taken by nurses at district or unit level which, in terms of the workforce, may be about deciding how many nurses it is possible to"squeeze out of a budget or how to negotiate around a budget to obtain a particular number of nurses.
However, at ward level, sisters can be in a position to take key decisions about manpower.
For example, the type of helper required on the ward to carry out non-nursing work.
Routine Decisions
Routine, or maintenance, decisions are often, for example, taken at unit level, where present manpower allocation to wards is based on tradition.
Routine decisions allow the present system to keep going to keep the status quo.
They are also evident at ward level in work allocation and rostering of staff off-duty.
Decisionless Decisions
Decisionless decisions can arise at all levels of the organisation.
They often occur because of conflicting considerations producing inactivity.
In terms of manpower all three types of decision are constantly being made at all levels of the nursing organisation.
It is to be hoped that as a result of the guidance in the subsequent paragraphs most will be confined to the first two categories.
CHANGING THE PATTERN
The answers to some of the questions posed in this booklet may give rise to the need for change.
It is one thing to determine that better use could be made of staff, it is another to change the existing situation.
The first ingredient for success is that managers are sensitive to the impact that changes may make to the lives of those concerned.
The second is to be prepared to try to meet the objections of those affected by alternative arrangements.
The third is to recognise that the labour force is changing all the time and therefore different patterns of working can be gradually introduced.
No prescription will guarantee success but the cultivation of good staff/management relations by taking a positive approach to labour relations probably explains why some are successful and others are not.
Activity under the Control of Nurse Managers
Assessment of Need at Authority Level
Question:
Has an exercise been carried out to assess the required nursing establishment for the whole of the service provided by the health authority?
Each District Health Authority allocates annually a proportion of its budget to provide nursing services.
The first consideration facing the most senior manager in the Authority is to determine the most equitable distribution of this budget between the units of management delivering nursing care.
In practice the distribution between the various hospital and community services may have little objective foundation, having developed incrementally over a number of years.
An assessment of the relative position of each service will provide the basis for a review.
This will require a "whole district" approach using a system which takes account of direct patient-care workload, indirect patient-care workload and professional education.
The present state of the art raises difficulty in carrying out the exercise described above due to the absence of acceptable methods in some specialities.
However, this is no excuse for inaction, for a number of systems have been described which are of considerable assistance; for example, the Telford system which relies largely on professional judgement can be used to good effect (1).
A "bottom up" approach is used to construct a manpower profile.
Each patient area manager is asked to make an assessment of manpower needs and required to justify this assessment to other nurses.
The assessment relies largely on a combination of operational experience and professional judgement.
A recent report by the DHSS Operational Research Service reviews methods for calculating nurse demand and  recommends an evolutionary — start simple and refine as necessary — approach which has built-in evaluation and cross-checking elements to allow judgemental inputs to be scrutinized and upon which the process of informing, questioning and understanding can be based (1).
Once completed the exercise enables comparison to be made between hospitals/specialties and thus the inequities in financial distribution to be identified.
In itself, this information will not affect the immediate distribution of manpower but it will provide a basis for planning for changes in the manpower profile for each managerial unit.
It must be stressed that an exercise, such as the one mentioned is fundamental to the effective use of nursing manpower for it provides the foundation for subsequent decisions which may be less effective if handicapped from the outset.
Failure to pay due regard to the relativities between units will ensure that some nurses work under greater pressure than necessary and that some patients receive a reduced level of service.
Historically the balance between the "acute" and "Cinderella" services has favoured the former.
Although this exercise is time-consuming, it does not require repeating, provided updating is continuous.
At times when a patient area changes its function or service changes are introduced, the responsibility for updating should fall to the nurse or staff involved in service planning.
Action:
District level.
The senior nurse in the Planning Unit or another suitable senior nurse should be given the time and authority to carry out an establishment"exercise throughout the Health Authority.
A specific senior nurse should be given responsibility for updating the establishment profile as a result of planned developments in service which affect staffing requirements anywhere within the Health Authority.
Each unit manager should have the establishment profile for the area of control made available each time an adjustment is made.
Distribution of Funds at Authority Level
Question:
Has a plan been formulated to rectify any inequalities between units in the distribution of the nursing budget?
The required nursing establishment and that which is funded may be two completely different things.
Nevertheless with the information obtained from the exercise described above, the shortfall or over-provision fur the whole district and within each unit can be identified.
This information should be widely publicised to raise awareness among nurse managers and others of the current position and as preparation fur the inevitable adjustments which will follow in subsequent operational plans.
Over a period the aim should be to adjust nursing budgets and thus the number of nurses employed so that each unit/specialty is equally provided fur within the constraints of financial provision.
Additions to the Health Authority's financial allocation and changes in services should be utilised to redress the balance, through the annual planning cycle.
Action:
District level.
Through the annual planning cycle the levels of staff should be adjusted to reflect an equitable distribution of nursing manpower between the specialist units.
Unit level.
The manager submits proposals for changes in the nursing establishment, based on the establishment profile.
Staff Utilisation at Operational Level
The exercise described in the preceding paragraphs provides a basis for arriving at the funded establishment of nurses for each unit which will enable the recruitment and employment of the labour force.
The effective use of this resource is the main substance of part II and therefore constitutes the bulk of the advice.
Although the various managerial tasks are interlinked, they are described discretely for ease of reference.
Staff Mix — Grade and Skill
Questions:
Does the unit manpower profile indicate the staff required fur each patient area by grade and skill?
Does the recruitment of staff take into account both grade and skill requirements?
Does the deployment of staff reflect the skill and grade requirements of the wards/departments concerned?
Action taken to determine the desired nursing establishment levels should indicate the optimum manpower profile for each ward and unit.
The profile would usually be the number of qualified and unqualified staff required for each span of duty over a 24-hour period.
The assessment would have taken account of the skills necessary to provide patient care and therefore indicate the grades of staff likely to be required.
It must be remembered that the competence of enrolled nurses is different from that of registered nurses and therefore these grades should not be used interchangeably.
However, neither should it be assumed that grade mix and skill mix are the same thing.
Nurses of the same grade may possess different skills and thus each ward/department must identify its specific skill requirements It may be necessary to employ nurses who have undergone further training or gained additional skills through  experience.
Each unit profile will need to describe grades with added information about particular skill needs.
As a general rule, the areas wherein the patient's nursing needs are changing rapidly will require a greater concentration of skilled nursing staff than those where the patient's health status is stable.
To date, there are no acknowledged"systems' which can be used reliably to determine skill mix.
The last attempt undertaken by the DHSS concluded as much and observed that the judgement of the ward sister was fundamental in arriving at the appropriate mix of staffing (1).
In the view of the College, relying on professional judgement is entirely appropriate, whereby differences of assessment arrived at by individuals can be compared and the assessors requested to justify their proposals; thus enabling agreement on an optimum solution.
This exercise is a refinement of the one carried out for the whole district in that it takes more account of local needs and provides additional information over and above the grades of staff required.
From this information it will be possible to identify the number of nurses needed who have gained post-.registration qualifications in particular nursing specialties.
It will also provide part of the basis upon which to determine post-registration education activity.
Action:
Ward level.
Ward managers identify specific skills, over and above those incorporated in basic training, needed for patient care in each ward.
Unit level.
Managers determine staff numbers required possessing additional skills fur the unit.
Determine how skills can be obtained and take executive action either to recruit or to develop existing staff.
Staff Mix — Full time/Part time
Questions:
Having taken account of the patients' needs, has management distributed the workload as evenly as possible across the 24 hours for each patient area?
Has each unit assessed the workload distribution and prepared a profile which reflects the workload distribution over the 24-hour 7-day span of activity?
Is the information used centrally to determine the proportions of staff which should be on duty at any particular time of day?
Is the employment of full-time and part-time staff matched against the workload across the 7-day period?
At the time of writing this report, nurses who are employed on a full-time basis work 37½ hours per week.
Considering that there ate 168 hours in each week, it becomes quite obvious that it is unlikely that staffing rosters could be arranged which would permit the employment of full-time staff only.
Additionally the workload in any patient area is distributed unevenly throughout the day and in any case the patient's day should not be designed only to suit the availability of the staff.
Staff availability should be determined by the work to be done.
The most rigorous efforts to spread the work evenly throughout the day will not meet with total success for there will always be some predictable peaks and troughs of activity.
The fact that they arc to some extent predictable does enable management to identify the times when staffing needs will be increased.
Whether the unit utilises a staff deployment system which is based on internal rotation or a separate night staffing, there will he an established shift system.
This should provide some opportunity to employ staff for specific shifts.
It is most commonly apparent where staff are employed to provide night cover only and therefore contracted to work specific hours to provide one, two or three night's cover per week.
In the same way it is possible to recruit staff to work any combination of shifts during the daytime.
In arriving at the correct mix of full-time to part-time staff the objective should be to determine the best fit between the staff required and the staff available.
Some Health Authorities pursue policies which limit or eradicate the use of part-time staff.
This is a foolish policy which inevitably leads to a waste of nursing resources.
The Auditor General's criticism of the excessive overlap between shifts, which in some hospitals was found to be too generous to allow only for handover and meal breaks, could be largely countered by establishing the correct balance of staff employed full-time with others employed on a part-time basis.
The optimum balance between full- and part-time staff will differ widely, dependent on workload at particular times of the  day and the established pattern of working hours in each location.
Traditionally, psychiatric hospitals have worked a two-shift system by day with few meal breaks and with a limited overlap in the middle, whereas acute hospitals tend to provide unpaid meal breaks and large overlap between the morning and afternoon shifts.
Whatever the existing shift pattern it will be possible to identify points in the day when the workload is predictably higher; for example, parts of the morning or evening.
It might be helpful at these times to have more staff available and less at others.
However, it is not possible to require full-time staff to work for periods of duty which only cover the peak workloads.
These are the times when part-time staff should be utilised.
For example, extra staff between 0800–1100 hours or 1800–2300 hours may be recruited specifically fur any number or combination of these shifts.
Operating theatres, accident and emergency departments and Day Hospitals may also have uneven workloads of a different pattern which can be met by part-time employees.
These considerations emphasise the necessity of assessing each department's staffing needs in much more detail, building up an ideal distribution of staff across the day to meet the expected peaks and troughs of work.
In short, the staff required on duty will vary from time to time and this should be reflected in the hours for which nurses are recruited to permanent contracts.
The organisation making the most economic use of nurses may expect to have a good proportion of its staff on part-time contracts.
However, for the reasons stated, it is not possible to give any precise figure.
In practice each patient area should indicate its staffing requirements in detail over 24 hours and for a typical 7-day period.
This can be achieved by an exercise which divides the day into two-hour sessions upon which the senior nurse indicates her workload pressures across a four-point scale: very high, high, medium, low.
From this, nursing managers can calculate the peak periods across the whole unit and also identify times for which it would be beneficial to employ part-time staff.
This would permit the recruitment of a labour force which matches approximately the nursing workload and permits the deployment of staff to each patient area on the basis of perceived need.
Additionally it will ensure that staff are not employed when not required.
Action:
Ward level.
Managers review the distribution of work throughout the 24-hour periods and adjust the patient's day where appropriate.
Ward managers report on expected levels of work over specific period of time throughout a typical week.
Unit level.
The manager produces a whole hospital work-level profile for specific periods of time for a 7-day period.
The manager identifies the period of the day when staffing levels require uplift.
The manager calculates the number of additional hours required to meet the periods of peak workload.
The manager calculates what proportion and for what periods staff should be employed on a part-time basis.
The manager adjusts recruitment activity to create optimum balance between the number of full-time and part-time staff.
Flexible Hours
Question:
Has consideration been given to the introduction of flexible working hours?
The practice of nurses working flexible hours, which is largely controlled by the needs of the nursing team, has to date been given little attention.
It is not a replacement for the considerations of staff mix described above.
In fact where there is a great deal of evidence of use, this could be a substitute for poor employment practice which has failed to take account of matching manpower/patient needs.
Nevertheless, in any system which is Orientated towards providing a service to people by people, not everything is predictable.
The best laid plans will still be disturbed by human events, and hospitals are no exception.
Often, unpredictability is the reason given for doing nothing.
Flexible working is an added opportunity to provide even more refinement by allowing staff at the sharp end to make their own judgements about staffing levels on a day-to-day basis.
Any number of circumstances may give rise to a fluctuation in workload thus upsetting staffing predictions.
Almost all staff, given the opportunity, will behave responsibly if allowed to determine when they should come and go off duty.
They will still meet their contractual obligations but at a time more beneficial to the patients and thus be more cost effective.
Action:
District level.
In conjunction with staff organisations, the manager draws up a policy to enable the introduction of flexible-hours working.
Unit level.
The manager identifies patient areas where flexible hours would be acceptable and, in conjunction with the patient-area manager, determines the parameters of flexibility.
Ward level.
In conjunction with the staff concerned, the manager agrees modification in the duty rosters which guarantees staff cover of the patient area.
Deployment Systems
Annual Leave
Questions:
If annual leave is not distributed on a whole hospital/unit basis, what is the rationale for  it be devolved?
Have steps been taken to assess the impact of educational events and learner allocation on the availability of manpower?
Have steps been taken to assess the impact of building programmes and medical staff absence on patient activities?
Following the receipt of requests from staff and the allocation of leave as a result, will there be an optimum spread of staff available throughout the year?
The distribution of annual leave to nurses is of great importance to the individual nurse and to the employer.
Unfortunately, few activities can be shut down for set periods, most being operational all the year round.
Although annual leave must be taken to meet the needs of the service, it must also take into account the needs of the staff.
With few exceptions, most people would wish to have a holiday of at leapt two weeks in the summer period which for some may also be confined to the time when children are on holiday from school or when the local factory is closed.
Allowing for these considerations, the manager must attempt to match the availability of staff with the needs of patients, which in the main requires an even distribution of staff absence.
Left to their own devices, few people understandably wish to take a holiday in the winter months, other than at Christmas.
Thus without control, a very uneven spread of available nurses arises.
This is particularly important in areas where the workload is even, such as many long-stay hospitals.
Fluctuations in staff availability are particularly disruptive, for periods of apparent shortage may be hard to tolerate and periods of relative overstaffing serve only to heighten discontentment when staff are scarce.
Unfortunately it is insufficient to total the number of weeks of holiday to be taken in the year by staff and divide by fifty-two.
Although this would give an even number of staff available, other factors must be considered.
As a prerequisite to leave allocation, events likely to have a bearing on workload and staff availability must be identified.
a) Will some parts of the organisation reduce work at certain times because of public holidays?
b) Will doctors, particularly surgeons, be away for predictable periods of time?
c) Will the "works" programme, which includes repair and upgrading, require some patient areas to be evacuated?
d) Will the allocation of learners to patient areas fluctuate and, if so, when?
e) Are educational events organised which will involve service staff?
With this information it will be possible to calculate the manpower effect on staff availability and workload which can be taken into account when organising annual leave.
Quite simply, the peaks and troughs can be evened out by forecasting the number that can be permitted to be away in each grade at any given week which is a simple mathematical exercise.
Requests for leave can then be matched with weeks available.
It is advisable when planning the leave year to exclude the last two weeks to permit "mopping up" of outstanding leave entitlement arising through sickness or staff joining during the latter part of the year.
In practice, medical workload is often reduced in the summer period and educational events usually organised at the least popular holiday times, so this serves further to simplify the exercise.
These factors will be returned to later for they can also be positively influenced by management intervention.
In some situations holiday arrangements might be organised at a lower level in the organisation, particularly in specialist areas, such as operating theatres, where interchange of staff between departments is less easy.
Even then the consideration outlined should still be taken into account.
In the main, however, it is advised that annual leave should be allocated on a whole-hospital approach.
If agreed at lower levels, it tends to increase the peaks and troughs and certainly does not permit the preceding considerations.
An even distribution has an added advantage, the institution will be better able to cope with the Unpredictable.
An infectious outbreak among the staff at a time when holidays are at a peak will be more difficult to manage.
Action:
Unit level.
The manager obtains information from consultant medical staff on holiday distribution.
The manager obtains information on any works programme which will reduce patient accommodation.
The manager obtains information about the number of learners available to provide service for each week of the year.
The manager obtains information on the distribution of post-basic education events throughout the year.
The manager determines those service areas which should organise holiday arrangements internally.
Using the above information, the manager calculates the number of service staff by grade who should be on annual leave for each week of the year.
The manager provides staff with the opportunity to make requests for annual leave.
Ward Rostering
Questions:
Are ward/department duty rotas planned well in advance?
Can staff agree changes of duty between themselves?
Can the ward manager demonstrate that staff deployment matches predictable workload variations?
Does senior management have a system for monitoring the outcome of ward-based rostering?
Has internal rotation been considered as a method of providing ward/department cover?
In the main, the allocation of duties to staff at ward level is one aspect of staff deployment which is carried out effectively.
However, there are a number of pressures which may be exerted upon the local manager, usually a ward sister/charge nurse, which can detract from the effective use of staff.
Clearly the ward sister will have an in-depth knowledge of the workload and fluctuations.
She will be able to predict first-hand the impact of operating lists and other ward events.
However, she will also have to deal with pressures from her own colleagues who are seeking special consideration for personal reasons.
Because it has to be dealt with at a personal level, some find it difficult to deny the request.
This can lead to duties being allocated without due regard for the needs of patients.
The best insurance against this happening is for time-off to be planned well in advance so that staff and the ward manager can make the adjustments necessary to ensure that patient needs are met.
Requests which arise after off-duty rosters are complete should be dealt with sympathetically but not at the expense of patients or other staff.
One solution is to require staff to seek the cooperation of a colleague who is prepared to accommodate them.
When possible, a system of internal rotation of staff covering the 24-hour period is desirable.
A separately organised night-nursing service tends to fragment patient care.
When 24-hour staffing is provided by the ward or department team, they are more likely to respond to requests for a change in working arrangements to meet an unavoidable staffing shortfall.
One result of devolving off-duty allocation to ward level may be arrangements which take too much account of staff interests.
Staff may be allocated time off at the most popular times or, conversely, allowed to work when financial rewards are increased.
The determining factor should be the needs of patients.
As a consequence off-duty rotas should be monitored to ensure that the best use is being made of staff available.
In planning ward staffing, the ward manager should start with a clear view of the number of staff she is likely to require at various times of the day.
She should begin by allocating days off, allowing the maximum numbers to be away on the days of least workload.
Iii some situations, the workload will be constant which simplifies the task.
At times when she is able to predict a likely shortfall below what is acceptable, due to sickness or annual leave, she should, as soon as possible, make her manager aware of the situation so that alternative staff may be provided.
Action:
Ward level.
The manager predicts variations in workload for the off-duty period.
The manager allocates days off, taking into account patient workload and staff requests.
Taking account of the skills available and patient care required, the manager allocates available staff to produce the best possible match.
Unavoidable shortfalls of staffing levels are made known to the immediate manager.
Unit level.
Routine checks of ward rosters should be made to assess that ward managers are producing the best match between patient needs and staff off duty entitlements.
The cumulative effects of off-duty allocation on the whole unit should be identified so that contingency plans to meet unexpected staff shortfall can be formulated.
Shift Arrangements
Questions:
Can the periods allowed for information exchange between shifts be justified?
Are the periods of overlap being used to good effect?
Does the shift overlap in the afternoon include time for meal breaks as well as handover?
Allowing time for handover and meal breaks, what is the optimum time required for the afternoon overlap of shifts?
In the main, shift arrangements reflect the pattern of the patient's day.
As a result, a patient can relate to one group of staff during the waking hours, and knows that the same staff will be caring for him during the night period.
To wake in the night and find a stranger on the scene can create confusion and cause distress.
Changes of staff during the sleeping hours should be avoided.
There has been much criticism of the overlap period, particularly in the afternoon.
Some of this criticism is justified, some is born out of ignorance.
First, all overlap periods must allow adequate time for exchange of information between the staff coming to duty and those leaving.
This will generally be necessary three times per day at least; morning, lunchtime and late evening.
It is not possible to prescribe a set period of time, for the need will vary in different situations.
Once again where the patients' conditions are changing rapidly, in general, more time will be required.
Second, time may also be required for joint activities between staff, case conferences or staff meetings.
All patient areas need time set aside for staff to discuss general issues such as work organisation, approaches to care, new policies and other topics of general interest.
Third, time may also be needed for group activities with patients.
In units with long-stay residents or psychiatric units this may be particularly important and is a necessary part of the programme.
As a general guide, at least half to one hour is needed, depending on the situation.
The hospital ward is a very complex area with a multiplicity of communication networks.
Failure in communication is often the base from which many problems arise.
Managers should be preoccupied not with eliminating the overlap period but with ensuring that the period allowed is adequate and properly utilised.
Some misunderstanding arises about the overlap during the afternoon period, because within this period one group of staff will have to take lunch when the afternoon shift arrive on duty and the others to take tea before the early shift goes off duty.
This requires at least a further hour to be added to the overlap, thus a minimum of 2–2½ hours in total is justifiable in some circumstances.
Therefore, between 2 and 4 hours will be needed for shift overlap purposes over a 24-hour period.
Action:
Ward level.
Where an overlap of shifts exists, the nurse in charge should ensure that the time available is used to good effect.
Where shift overlaps permit the majority of staff to be on duty at the same time, the opportunity should be taken to discuss, review and resolve issues relating to patient care and other work related matters.
Unit level.
Through personal observation and enquiry, the manager should reassure himself that the length of the overlap period is fully justified for necessary communication and activity.
When time is being underutilised, a review of the patient's day should be undertaken so that the overlap can be used more effectively.
Consistent underuse of the overlap period should result in a review of the off-duty system to reduce overlap.
Meeting Contingencies
So far, this report has described arrangements which are designed for staff who have a commitment to providing services at predetermined times and, in the main, to specific patient areas.
To make the best use of nursing resources, there is a requirement for a degree of flexibility.
This flexibility should not be achieved by moving staff around at will, for the lack of stability is a contributory factor to wastage.
It is possible to provide flexibility by alternative means using a group of workers who understand their role from the outset.
Questions:
Have local managers given consideration to the ways of minimising the effects of unexpected absence among staff?
Is there a policy on the use of overtime?
Has an attempt been made to identify nurses in the local community who would be prepared to work on a casual basis?
Has the possibility of two or more employees sharing one post been considered?
Have discussions taken place with proprietors of nursing agencies with a view to assessing the cost effectiveness of using agency nurses?
Overtime
In the event of a sudden shortfall in staffing levels, the agreement of sonic staff members to work additional hours may be needed.
This can be a costly solution because it may result in the involvement of staff who must forgo their needed rest period or the employment of nurses from an inappropriate grade.
The manager's priority is to fill the gap and he therefore may accept the offer of someone even though there may be cost implications,
Guidance on the use of overtime is helpful to managers who find themselves faced with an immediate staffing problem.
Circumstances in which overtime may be used should be  identified, together with a list of staff who have agreed to be approached in time of need.
Action:
Health Authority level.
A policy on overtime working should be agreed with staff organisation.
Unit level.
Staff willing to work additional hours beyond those for which they are contracted should be identified.
The use of overtime and the staff involved should be monitored to ensure compliance with the policy.
Ward level.
The need for additional staff should be identified at the earliest opportunity after consideration of alternative means of meeting the shortfall.
Relief Pool
Nurse managers used to overcome their service deficiency by utilising learners to fill the gaps.
This practice has been discouraged by the training authorities and is now less common.
Some find great benefit in identifying a small group of staff who for a limited period are assigned to a relief pool, for the sole purpose of filling unexpected gaps in staffing or adding strength to a ward team at times of peak workload.
Those assigned to the relief pool will be allocated to a particular patient area before starting duty each day.
This arrangement is not popular with staff and should therefore be for a predetermined limited period.
Staff allocated in this way should be experienced nurses and not, as is often the case, the more recently trained.
If used with consideration, this type of experience can form part of a developmental programme.
Action:
Unit level.
A system for allocating a small number of staff from a central point on a daily basis should be devised.
Staff selected for inclusion in the "Relief Pool" should regard it as an experience which will assist their personal development.
Nurses Bank
An alternative to the relief pool, the Nurses Bank, can provide the same facility.
Nurses volunteer their services when they wish to work and managers engage them at the times required.
Nurses are invited to apply to join the Nurses Bank.
They are selected in the same way as other recruits but not given a contract of employment.
The working arrangement is that a nurse will telephone a central point each week to say when she is available to work.
In turn, following examination of staffing schedules, she will be informed if there is work available at her convenience.
This is a useful means of keeping nurses with other commitments in touch with nursing and the Health Authority and therefore is a good route for recruitment.
It does provide a means of enabling nurses with small children or other dependents to remain in employment.
The employer does not pay for holidays or sickness and the nurse in turn works at her convenience.
It is similar to the nursing agency arrangement but is preferable because the Health Authority is able to be more selective about whom it employs.
Assistance and support for the scheme may be available from the local Job Centre.
Action:
Health Authority level.
A member of staff who will be responsible for the control of the Bank should be identified.
The local nursing consultant from the Manpower Services Commission should be contacted for advice and local Job Centre involvement.
Arrangements, involving local managers, for selection of nurses for the Bank should be drawn up.
Arrangements for notification of staffing needs to the Bank should be devised.
A leaflet to explain the working of the system should be prepared for distribution to all recruits.
Job-Sharing
The introduction of a job-sharing scheme can be useful in two differing circumstances: first, where there are insufficient full-time posts to meet the number of applicants and, second, when the posts cannot be filled due to insufficient numbers.
The first instance most commonly occurs when a group of students complete training at the same time.
The number of funded vacancies may be insufficient for all of them to be offered full-time posts.
However, management will be aware that vacancies will arise in the ensuing months.
A failure to adapt to this situation will result in more newly qualified staff leaving for other types of work or training when a period of work experience would have been valuable.
In the second instance, some posts may be advertised repeatedly but to no avail.
A possible solution to both problems is to arrange for two or three people to share one post.
This is different from straightforward part-time employment because job-sharing requires those concerned to arrange among themselves the distribution of the hours of a full-time employee.
For example, a staff nurse's post in an operating theatre may be filled by one nurse working 22½ hours per week over three days and another 15 hours per week on the other two operating days.
Additionally, the nurses can be given responsibility for determining how they will allocate the hours between themselves and on which days they will report for duty.
Any number of combinations is possible which enables some nurses with domestic responsibilities to contribute to the care of patients who would otherwise be unemployed.
In areas of high unemployment many newly qualified staff are happier to have a part-time post with the knowledge that they will he offered full-time employment as posts become available, than to have no post at all.
Additionally, they do have continuity of employment and can be given the opportunity to do extra hours whenever possible.
Action:
Health Authority level.
A job-sharing policy should be devised in conjunction with staff organisations.
Unit level.
In conjunction with the Director of Nurse Education (DNE) the manager should produce information about the numbers of staff graduating from nurse training for at least one year in advance.
The manager should predict the likely vacancies arising from all sources of wastage for at least one year in advance.
The manager should match output from the education department with vacancies arising to determine the number of posts which will remain unfilled or the shortfall of posts against demand.
In either instance the posts suitable for job-sharing should be identified.
Posts which cannot be filled should be considered as to their suitability for a job-sharing arrangement.
Advertisements inviting applications from individuals wishing to job-share or from a pair prepared to share with each other should be prepared for local distribution.
Nursing Agencies
Some Health Authorities are dependent upon agencies for providing their regular staffing requirements.
The agency is a valuable resource to meet staffing shortfalls or an unexpected increase in workload.
It is similar to the nurse bank but independently controlled.
The Health Authority does not have an involvement in staff selection.
However, agencies are subject to inspection and statutory control by the Health Authority, and so generally can be relied upon for a high standard of service.
Requests for staff should be given with the maximum amount of notice.
This will not only facilitate the request but also enable consideration of continuity.
The more time given to the agency, the more likely it is to provide a satisfactory response.
Action:
Health Authority level.
Discussion with the local agency should be instituted to establish the range and level of service which could be expected.
Guidelines for managers on the use of agency staff should be devised.
Activity which Can Be Influenced by Managers of Nurses
Education
Educational activities and annual leave, together provide the main reason for staff being unavailable for work.
This section of the guide needs to be read in conjunction with the section on annual leave.
The coordination of these two features of manpower management can produce an even deployment of staff and thus greatly improve their effective use.
Basic Education
Questions:
Have discussions taken place between the unit manager and the director of nurse education to facilitate the best match between the needs of nurses in training and those of the service?
Is the allocation officer aware of the service needs of each patient area which is to be taken into account when devising the plan of allocation?
These questions may lead the reader to believe that the plans for nurse training should be centred on the needs of the service.
This is certainly not the case, although this has been the prevailing attitude from senior nurses for many years.
Education plans are made well in advance and for each intake of learners it should be possible to predict their whereabouts for the whole of the training period.
This enables service managers to plan around the peaks and troughs created by an inevitable uneven distribution of learners.
A plan which creates a continuous supply of pairs of hands for each patient area is an impossibility and the sooner managers accept this, the better.
However, there is room for cooperation on this front.
The closest cooperation between the allocation officers and each unit manager is essential both in devising the plan and in the scheduling of holidays.
The unit manager should participate in devising the systems of allocation and annual leave and should utilise the completed schedules as a basis for planning the deployment of his own service staff.
Action:
Unit level.
The manager should discuss with the DNE the basis for formulating the allocation and holiday plan.
The manager should discuss with the allocation officer the detailed plans of allocation and holidays for nurses in training.
Post-Basic/In-Service Education
Questions:
Are educational events timed to assist the provision of patient services?
Are educational events planned between service managers and educationalists?
Further education of nurses within a Health Authority can be programmed to assist the needs of the service.
Short courses or one-day events can be scheduled to avoid peak holiday periods and should take account of the presence of learners in patient areas.
Ideally, further education activities should take place at a time when the qualified staff can most easily be spared.
This will arise at times when other staff are more readily available.
In the absence of careful planning, it will not occur.
Action:
Unit level.
The manager should provide the school of nursing with details of the times of the year when courses for qualified staff would be most acceptable.
The manager should identify the number of staff which can be released at any time and provide the information to the school of nursing.
Deployment of Other Staff
Questions:
Are managers of nurses kept informed of deployment variations affecting other groups of staff?
Are managers of nurses given information about annual leave arrangements of other staff?
The deployment of other groups of staff should take account also of the needs of the service and aim to provide for an even distribution.
Inevitably this will not always be possible but reduction in portering or domestic staff will result in additional burdens for nurses who should be giving their attentions to patient care.
The providers of domestic, portering and ward ancillary staff are also subjected to pressure from staff for the peak-holiday periods.
Failure to optimise the level of support to the caring team will undermine efforts to distribute annual leave evenly among nurses.
The gateway to the hospital bed is largely controlled by doctors and therefore their absence or presence is fundamental to this issue.
In particular surgical workload is likely to be reduced by the holidays of particular surgeons.
It may even be possible to reduce the number of staffed available beds at this time.
For this reason it is vital that the managers of nurses have a clear indication of the holiday arrangements of the medical staff.
They should be informed when each consultant intends to take a main summer holiday, which would considerably help the planning of nursing rotas.
Action:
Unit level.
The manager should explain to other heads of department the importance of maintaining even distribution of staff throughout the year.
Support service managers should ensure that contracts for the provision of support services take account of the need for a continuous predetermined level of service.
The manager should ascertain as early as possible the intentions of medical staff, particularly surgeons, with regard to the summer leave commitments.
The allocation of annual leave to nurses should take account of the intentions of senior medical staff.
Medical Policies and Practice
Appointment of Consultant Medical Staff
Question:
Are the managers of nurses given the opportunity to assess the consequences of the establishment of new or replacement consultant staff?
The appointment of a new consultant within a Health Authority almost invariably brings a change in working practices and an increased workload for nurses.
* As far as possible, the impact of a new appointment should be assessed and provided for in financial terms, thus enabling, where necessary, additional staff to be appointed.
Action:
Health Authority level.
When planning for the appointment of either additional or replacement medical staff, the manager should have the opportunity to assess the nursing consequences of the appointment.
The nurse adviser to the Health Authority should seek additional funds to meet developments in clinical activity.
In the event of plans not being funded, the nurse adviser should estimate the effects on patient care and make known her views.
Unit level.
The manager of nurses should contribute to the preparation of the job specification for consultant appointments.
Ward level.
The manager should consider the possibility of rescheduling medical involvement in the patient area in order to allow for improved staff utilisation.
Bed Utilisation
Questions:
Are the managers of nurses consulted when changes in the use of beds is being considered?
Do medical staff take account of representation by managers of nurses about the staffing levels in patient areas?
Any change in medical practice or the use of beds will had an impact on nursing services.
For this reason there must be the closest cooperation over plans to change the status quo.
Decreases in the length of Stay; increases in the number of operations performed; the introduction of new pieces of equipment; new investigatory procedures; new operations and other medical innovations will all have an impact upon the levels of nursing required.
At times the manager of nurses may have to object to the fact that the nursing consequences of such moves is unsupportable.
In practice, this should be before the changes have been introduced.
Consequently managers must be involved with plans of change in medical activity and make clear their accountability for the standard of nursing care.
Action:
Ward level.
The manager must assess the consequences of change in medical policy and relate the effect on workload to the number of staff available.
Failure to persuade medical staff of the adverse consequences on patient care should be reported to the next level of management.
Unit level.
The manager should be involved in all discussions which have an impact on the workload levels in patient areas.
Building Programmes
Questions:
Are building programmes for the next financial year drawn up in time to be available to managers before holidays are allocated?
Are closures of patient areas for cleaning and decorating known well in advance?
All patient areas require alteration, decoration and cleaning from time to time.
If this is known in good time, it may be possible to fit the programme to the availability of staff or alternatively redeploy staff when the work is in progress.
Some hospitals utilise temporary ward closures as an opportunity to give staff annual leave.
Some try to match the closure programme to meet the Staff needs.
Action:
Unit level.
The manager should discuss the proposals for the coming year's maintenance programme before the allocation of annual leave to nurses.
The number of staff on leave at any one time Should take account of the building programme.
CONCLUSION
Part II should assist managers of nurses to make better use of the nursing staff at their disposal.
It has touched briefly on a number of activities which all contribute to better staff utilisation.
It has been assumed there is a labour force to manage.
The business of obtaining and retaining nurses is dealt with in part I.
For the past ten years, managers have generally been able to take for granted that nurses will be there to manage.
The high level of unemployment has lead many to become casual and unimaginative in their employment practices.
However those who do not manage what they have will increasingly be faced with a much greater problem as the number of school leavers reduces rapidly.
The "demographic time-bomb" as it has become known will ensure that those who are nurses and those who decide to train to become nurses will become more precious by the year.
Competition for employees will increase and clearly many major industries are preparing their plans to ensure that they remain competitive.
To date there is little evidence of this happening within the NHS but it must soon occupy our attention as a matter of urgency.