

THE STV DISSECTED
A reminder first of all of the way in which the STV would work in parliamentary constituencies.
Each constituency would return from three to nine members, five being generally regarded as the optimum number.
Every elector would have one vote.
It would not be cast by marking the familiar X opposite the name of a single candidate.
Instead it would be an expression of preferences, indicated by putting the figure 1 opposite the name of the first-preferred candidate, the figure 2 opposite the name of the second-preferred and so on.
The preferences could include as many or as few of the candidates as the voter wished.
A candidate would be elected not by securing a plurality of votes but by securing a quota of votes.
A quota is established by dividing the total number of valid votes by the number of members to be elected plus one, and rounding up or adding one to the quotient.
In the framework of the STV this apparently strange formula is rational.
In a typical United Kingdom five-member constituency 250,000 votes might be cast.
The quota would then be 250,000 divided by five-plus-one, i.e. 41,667.
No more than five candidates could be credited with more than 41,667 votes each.
The quota is the smallest number of votes to allow five candidates to be elected and is just big enough to prevent the election of more than five.
When the first-preference votes are counted any candidate who has secured a quota is declared elected.
After that — or if there are no such candidates — transfers come into operation, entailing fresh counts.
Votes are successively transferred from candidates who have a surplus of votes over and above the quota and from candidates excluded as having the smallest number of votes in the relevant count.
Votes are transferred to the candidate next in the voter's order of preference who has neither been already elected or excluded, i.e. to the next "continuing candidate" , as the STV jargon has it.
Transfers and re-countings of votes should in theory continue until the requisite number of members have been elected, all with a quota.
In practice a stage is quite often reached at which, whilst the requisite number of members have not yet been elected, no candidate is left who can reach the quota.
In that case a plurality of outstanding votes suffices for a candidate (or occasionally more than one candidate) to be declared elected.
A single vote, wasted votes and used votes
Nothing escapes attention so easily as the obvious.
Thus nobody seems to notice that the oddest thing about the STV is precisely that it is a single vote — for that is what it is, no matter how many preferences are expressed.
If five members are to be elected in your constituency your natural expectation would be that you should have five votes.
Not so: you are given only one — transferable, it's true (and of that much more later)— but still just one.
If it turns out to have been effective — and it may not — it will have helped to return one member.
For the election of the other four you will be at the mercy of other people's votes.
It's as if you had been given not one vote, but a fifth of a vote.
Strange, that a system that purports to give the voter more power to elect should have as its very basis this bizarre limitation.
It is, however, a limitation essential to the working of the system.
To give voters five votes each, all of them transferable, would result in an intolerable proliferation of candidates fielded to attract those votes, utter contusion in the minds of electors and a nightmare of transferring and of counting.
So one vote it has to be.
The system is cranky from the start.
For this single vote unusual potency is claimed: it is a vote that will seldom be wasted.
According to the STV's advocates votes are wasted if they do not contribute to a candidate's election or are superfluous.
So if under our present system 25,000 votes go to Alphonse and 15,000 to Belinda and 10,000 to Cuthbert, the votes wasted are the 25,000 given to the two defeated candidates plus 9,999 of the votes given to Alphonse who needed only 15,001 to defeat Belinda, his closest competitor.
On  the other hand a large majority of single transferable votes are, it is argued, effective: roughly five-sixths in a five-member constituency.
The quantum of satisfaction derived by a voter from helping to elect a candidate he has ranked fifth or sixth or lower is not easy to assess.
Some satisfaction, let it be conceded; and it will certainly be true that most voters will find that a candidate for whom they have expressed some preference will have been elected.
To make that possible the system resorts to three major devices already mentioned: preferential voting, the transferability of votes and election by quotas.
They are closely interrelated, separated though they must be for the purpose of analysis — and they are all questionable.
Preferential voting, transferability and quotas
First, then, does preferential voting make sense?
Of course any fool can write down 1,2,3,4 and even 5,6,7,8 opposite the names of candidates on a ballot paper.
Whether he would put those figures in the same places tomorrow is perhaps open to question.
To the extent that rank-ordering means giving preferences to candidates of one party rather than another it is both easy and reasonable.
One may be less sanguine about the average voter's capacity to rank candidates, whether of one preferred party or more than one, according to their relative merit and aptitude.
That exercise, inevitably based on superficial and subjective assessments, allows too much scope for prejudice and irrationality.
It is well established that there are voters whose preferences are influenced by the alphabetical sequence in which candidates' surnames appear on the ballot paper.
There is a less obvious reason for having doubts about the value of the rank-ordering permitted and indeed encouraged by the STV.
It assumes that preferences are absolute.
They may well be contingent.
The voter is required to state his preferences, and to state them once for all, before any votes are counted.
They might be different if he had the opportunity to change them after each stage of the count.
Provision is made for this possibility in a system that  has some affinity with the STV, namely the exhaustive ballot.
It is used by the Conclave of Cardinals to choose a Pope, by the Democratic and Republican Conventions in the United States to choose a presidential candidate, and by the Labour Party both to choose a Leader and to elect local officers.
In spite of its name the exhaustive ballot is not a single ballot but a series of ballots.
The result of each one is made known to the voter before he casts his vote in the next, and the series is prolonged until there emerges at the top of the poll a candidate with an absolute majority.
The system admits of variations, but usually requires the exclusion of the candidate having the fewest votes in each successive count.
So in an exhaustive ballot to choose one animal representative from among Ape, Bear, Camel, Donkey and Elephant the voting might go something like this: Clearly the exhaustive ballot is — like the STV — highly artificial.
It is a device for securing a make-believe absolute majority where no genuine absolute majority exists, and the winner is not the candidate most voters want but the candidate most voters are willing to accept.
Ape's final 115 votes are a not particularly appetizing hotchpotch.
Less than half of them are first-preference votes.
The rest are second- third- or fourth-preference votes that have been allowed in the end to decide the issue between him and his chief rival, Bear.
But that is by the way.
What is most  noteworthy here is that at every stage after the first the exhaustive ballot enables voters to vote knowledgeably.
After the first ballot they do not have to guess, they know that the leading contenders are Ape and Bear, that Camel may still be in the running but has a lot of ground to make up, and that Donkey and Elephant have very little hope of being elected.
Voters can cast their votes in the second ballot in the light of that knowledge, and will be similarly well informed before they cast them in the third and fourth.
The exhaustive ballot can be used only if the voters have the opportunity, the time and the inclination to participate in all the ballots that may be necessary — conditions that clearly cannot be met in parliamentary elections.
what it serves to emphasize in the present context is that the user of the STV is inevitably denied knowledge that could influence his preferences.
Suppose that an anti-Conservative voter could know his first-preference candidate had been eliminated at the first count, and how other anti-Conservative candidates had fared.
He would then be able to judge to which of the latter he could most advantageously give his second preference, and this informed choice could well not be the same as the "blind" choice the STV obliges him to make.
Like the exhaustive ballot the STV requires the successive exclusion of the candidates having the fewest votes.
This seems reasonable enough if they are very weak: in our imaginary animal election Elephant with his 20 votes in the first ballot and Donkey with his 18 don't at all look like possible winners.
But what about the outcome of the third ballot, in which 72 votes go to Ape, 65 to Bear and 63 to Camel?
Out goes Camel.
It could well be, however, that most or even all of Ape's supporters prefer Camel to Bear, and symmetrically that most or even all of Bear's supporters prefer Camel to Ape.
There is at least a possibility that given the opportunity to reconsider their votes a majority of voters would have chosen Camel.
Since he has been eliminated their true wishes may have been thwarted.
Under the STV as well as in an exhaustive ballot a candidate doomed to exclusion may have received a number of votes that is substantial and only marginally smaller than the number received by the candidate next above him in the relevant count.
There is no logical reason why he must be debarred from  receiving such additional votes as electors might wish to give him.
There is an expedient reason: without automatic exclusions the system could not work.
The transferability of votes is likewise a device essential to the operation of the system and devoid of any rational justification.
It is surely a fundamental principle of fair elections that all voters should cast the same kind of vote.
With the STV they do not, for some voters are allowed the effective use of votes of second or lower preference and some are not.
The granting or the withholding of that use depends on factors over which the voter has no control: lower-preference votes come into play only if higher-preference votes have proved surplus to the quotas of candidates who have been elected or have become useless to candidates who have been eliminated.
But if voters have voted for a successful candidate why should some of them — just which, we shall examine later — be given the opportunity to vote for another candidate?
What have they done to deserve this bonus?
And if voters have voted for an excluded candidate, why should they be permitted to switch their preference?
Any punter would be delighted to place a bet on the understanding that if his horse were to lose he would be able to transfer his stake to another horse in the next race — in STV terms, to another candidate in the next count — and perhaps even to another and yet another until at last he had backed a winner.
This is mere fantasy.
The 5TH adopts it as a reality.
A reality, moreover, fraught with undesirable potential.
There is a simple form of the STV, used only when a single candidate is to be elected, namely the alternative vote (the AV).
The name must not be taken to imply that the elector has only one alternative: he is at liberty to express as many preferences as there are candidates.
Those who secure the fewest votes in each successive count are eliminated, and votes originally given to them are transferred as in a full-scale STV election.
There can be no transfer of any surplus, for as soon as one candidate has more than 50% of the votes he is declared elected.
Since a member of the present shadow cabinet has been reported to favour "the alternative vote system of proportional representation" , we may note in passing that there is no such thing.
The AV has nothing to do with PARR and  it is easy to see why.
If there are four candidates in a constituency — Conservative, Labour, Liberal Democrat and Scottish Nationalist Party — and if thanks to the AV the Labour candidate is elected, first votes given to him will get 100% political representation in the constituency and first votes given to the other three candidates will get none at all: a strange sort of PARR, just like the sort our present system provides!
Here, however, our concern is less with proportionality than with rationality.
When the AV was being discussed in the House of Commons in 1931 Winston Churchill described it as"the worst of all possible plans, the least scientific and the most unreal.
The decision…is to be determined by the most worthless votes given for the most worthless candidates".
The exaggeration is rhetorical.
The substantive point remains, an argument not just against the AV but against the 5TH also.
I have irresponsibly given my first preference to a candidate of the Official Monster Raving Loony Party.
He is promptly excluded.
I have capriciously given my second preference to a candidate of the Communist Party.
He likewise disappears.
I have given my third and fourth preferences to candidates who, if not exactly "worthless" , know as well as I do they have no chance of being elected.
Out they go.
Now the only survivors are likely to be serious candidates.
I have given my filth-preference vote to one of them, and together with other much-transferred votes it may determine his election.
Some such process, with of course many variations, is frequently to be observed in the tabulated successive counts of STVs in Irish constituency elections.
Voters who have given their highest preferences to the weakest candidates are allowed to participate, perhaps decisively, in the contest between the strongest.
Commonsense finds this odd, and cannot approve.
What is even more odd is that like the AV the STV is allowed to retain its original unitary value however often it is transferred and whatever its preferential status.
As we shall see strange things, involving complex arithmetical manipulations, can happen to it in the process of transfer.
Its weighting remains unchanged.
Commonsense says it should be reduced.
The trouble is that any proposed reduction — granting for instance a value of 0.8 to a second preference and 0.6 to a third — is bound to be arbitrary.
But in requiring no reduction at all the STV is itself arbitrary.
A vote is not a coin which, tendered to make a purchase, retains its full value even though what is eventually bought is the purchaser's second or third or fourth or fifth choice.
Preferential voting expresses a judgement about relative worth.
Why should the same weight be given to Harry's second preference or Dick's fifth as to Tom's first"?
Why should preferences that are obviously not equal in the minds of voters be treated as if they were?
All other objections apart, the equalization of preferences suffices to condemn the STV.
It is the most transparent of the fictions it espouses, and is as unrealistic as it is unfair.
Election by quotas, the third major device of the STV, is the product of the other two, preferential voting and the transferability of votes.
As we saw earlier the successful candidates are those who can muster a quota of votes, the same for all of them however great the disparity in the number of votes they respectively received at the first count.
The only exceptions are candidates who, when all possible transfers have been made, are declared elected without having reached the quota.
For the rest the quota is the rule, and it is an obvious contrivance.
Candidates who exceed the quota are considered to have "too many" votes and must be cut down to size by having their surplus taken away.
So long as they are not excluded candidates having "too few" votes must be allowed to collect if they can enough transferred votes to bring them up to the quota.
Those who manage to do so will only by some very rare chance hit exactly the right number.
They are far more likely to exceed the quota, and having been brought up they must now forfeit their new-found surplus and be brought down.
STV propaganda appears to take a curious pride in emphasizing this equalization, failing to notice that in so doing it is merely emphasizing the artificiality of the system.
In the Dublin North constituency in February 1987 Haughey had 12,986 votes and Brady had 4,454 at the first count.
Since both were deemed to be elected with the same quota of 8,585 votes reality was replaced by fiction.
The reality was those 12,986 votes (4,401 above the quota) and those 4,454 votes (4,131 below the quota).
The fiction was that they could be honestly and legitimately equalized at the same quota figure, even though Haughey had nearly three times as many first-preference votes as Brady, and even though almost half of the votes by which Brady reached the quota were votes of second or lower preference, culled by transfers from nine other candidates in nine counts.
Pretence is, as has already been noted, a prominent characteristic of the STV.
Complications
Advocates of the system claim that it is "entirely logical" .
So it may be.
The difficulty is that the assumptions on which it is based are to say the least shaky: the assumptions, namely, that only one vote suffices although more than one candidate is to be elected; that preferential voting is reliable, even when used in ignorance of all the relevant information and inhibited by the arbitrary exclusion of candidates who might otherwise be successful; that it is reasonable to grant to some votes the privilege of being transferred, and to lower-preference votes the possibility of exercising greater influence than is warranted by their very definition; that it is reasonable also to give to all transferred votes the same weighting as to original votes; and that election by quota is sensible even if the quotas are manifestly make-believe.
But logical or not, the 5TH is certainly complicated — as the most respectable of its apologists admit, though they may prefer to call it "sophisticated" and will refrain from giving a full and candid account of the intricacies of its operation.
As might be supposed complications arise with regard to transfers of votes.
The first question is in what order they are to be made.
The simple answer is that surpluses, beginning with the largest, are transferred before votes from excluded candidates.
But this general rule is hedged about with various provisos, of which the following will serve as a specimen:
"A surplus shall not be subject to transfer when that surplus, together with any other surpluses at that particular stage of the count not already transferred, is —
(a) less than the difference between the total vote then credited to the continuing candidate with the lowest recorded vote and the vote of the candidate with the next lowest recorded vote; or
(b) less than the difference between the total votes of the two or more continuing candidates credited at that stage of the count with the lowest recorded total number of votes and the candidate next above such candidates".
(S.O.
1973 No. 890 The Northern Ireland Assembly (Election) Order 1973)
This delectable prose is no doubt clear — and quite incomprehensible to the ordinary voter.
Between him and the returning officer the STV opens an unbridgeable gulf.
Admittedly not all of the technicalities of the system are abstruse.
Many transfers are quite straightforward: votes are simply shifted, without modification, to the appropriate continuing candidate.
But rare are the STV elections that do not require the transfer once, twice, three times or even more of votes surplus to a quota.
How that is to be done necessitates an explanation that cannot be other than labyrinthine.
To serve as a thread I shall use some figures relating to the election in 1973 of seven members to represent the North Antrim constituency in the ill-fated Northern Ireland Assembly.
The quota was 8,907 and the first count gave Paisley 14,533 votes, a surplus of 5,626.
(A political party finds a surplus as large as this very gratifying, because the votes made available for transfer will, if voters are loyal, go a long way to ensuring the election of one or even two of its less popular candidates.)
Ballot papers on which no second preference is indicated clearly cannot be transferred.
However, on all the ballot papers giving Paisley first preference a second preference was in fact shown, and the question is how the transfer of his surplus of 5,626 should be effected.
To transfer the first 5,626 papers that came to hand would mean ignoring the 8,907 other papers on which Paisley was placed first, and the system reasonably requires that the second preferences expressed on those papers should also be taken into account.
There are two methods by  which this can be done.
The first, which is the simpler and the one used not in Northern Ireland but in the Republic, is to sort all of Paisley's papers into "sub-parcels" , one for each second-preference candidate, and then to give to each such candidate a number of votes calculated in accordance with the following formula: the surplus divided by the total number of transferable votes, multiplied by the number of papers in each sub-parcel.
(The surplus could be greater than the number of transferable votes — if, for example, a large proportion of the votes were non-transferable.
In that case the formula would not apply and the transferable votes would be transferred intact.)
There being 3,813 papers showing a second preference for Craig in our North Antrim constituency, the formula would have given him (5,626 + 14,533) x 3,813 = 1,476 additional votes, and other candidates would have received additional votes similarly calculated.
That is not the end of the matter.
Among the 3,813 papers showing a second preference for Craig, just which would be the 1,476 passed on to him?
The answer is: those that happened to be at the top of Craig's sub-parcel.
So no voter who gave Craig a second preference could be sure that it would actually be registered, for his paper could be one of the 3,813 — 1,476 = 2,337 that were not picked out for transfer.
Besides, there is no reason why the distribution of later preferences, any of which might become operative, would be the same on the 1,476 papers selected for transfer to Craig as it would be on all of the 3,813 papers including those not so selected.
Hence the risk of an unfair outcome.
It may seem small if the poll runs into tens of thousands.
It is real all the same, if only because close finishes, in which the result is determined by a marginal number of votes, are just as likely to occur under the STV as under any other electoral system.
This risk can be lessened by recourse to the alternative method of transferring surpluses, which uses the "senatorial rules" so called originally because of their use in elections to a small number of senates including the Senate of the Republic of Ireland.
They were applied in the Northern Ireland election we are examining.
The effect was that Craig did not receive 1,476 out of the 3,813 papers on which he was shown as a second preference.
Instead he  received all of the 3,813 papers, but each of them at a reduced value.
That value was determined by the formula already explained.
Paisley's surplus of 5,626 divided by 14,533, the total number of transferable votes cast, gives 0.39.
So the 3,813 papers transferred at 0.39 each were worth 1487.07 votes to Craig.
An alert arithmetician will notice a discrepancy between this figure and the 1,476 votes that would have gone to Craig under the simpler system.
The explanation is that — inaccurately but mercifully!— calculations under the senatorial rules are limited to two places of decimals.
Rounding up from 0.3871, the more exact figure, to 0.39 gave Craig an unearned bonus of I 1.07 votes.
Even the fussy senatorial rules do not eliminate the role of chance!
The sort of surplus Paisley had is sometimes called a "primary" surplus because it derives exclusively from first-preference votes.
In our North Antrim constituency another candidate besides Paisley had such a surplus.
With 9,009 first.preference papers Baxter had 102 votes to spare, the quota being as we know 8,907.
Of the 9,009 papers those on which a second preference was indicated were transferred in the same way as Paisley's surplus.
This time the value of each transferred paper was 0.01, and fourteen little sub-parcels worth from 53.31 down to 0.04 votes were distributed to fourteen continuing candidates.
Another kind of surplus is called "consequential" .
It results from a transfer which in bringing the beneficiary's total of votes up to the quota almost inevitably provides him also with more votes than he needed.
Thus our candidate Bill Craig received 8,538 first-preference votes, leaving him only 369 short of the quota.
As we saw he received votes to the value of I, 487.07 by transfer from Paisley's surplus.
So now he had in all 10,025.07 votes, 1,118.07 of them surplus to the quota.
A similar consequential surplus can arise at any stage of the count after the first.
How is it to be dealt with?
The rules of the STV game decree that the only ballot papers needing to be considered for transfer are those that came along last, i.e. in the present case those that lifted Craig's votes from below to above the quota.
The argument for not considering the other 8,538 votes originally given to him is that they have exhausted  their potential.
The latecomers — the 1,487.07 — are deemed not to have exhausted theirs.
Part of it has served to bring Craig's total up to the quota, but another part, being surplus to the quota, remains unused.
It can, however, be alternatively and more cogently maintained that all of Craig's papers ought to be examined, just as Paisley's were in the disposal of his surplus.
The votes last credited to Craig have in the present context a special significance only because they were added to the votes he had already received.
The last straw that breaks the camel's back is indeed the proximate cause of that misfortune.
A weightier cause is the burden the poor beast was carrying already.
Similarly — though the outcome is happier — with Craig's votes: all of them, the original as well as the transferred, contributed to his surplus, so all of them ought to be taken into account in its transfer.
Craig's is an untypically simple case inasmuch as his surplus arose as early as the second count and was disposed of in the third.
If a candidate is elected with a surplus at a later count the probability is that both the votes previously given to him and the votes immediately responsible for his surplus will include votes already transferred at earlier stages.
To examine all the relevant ballot papers in order to discover the next available preference (if any) that they show would be a task of daunting complexity.
Before it the system quails and adopts an easier but illogical alternative.
If, then, the only votes to be considered for transfer from a consequential surplus are those in the last-received sub-parcel, just what is the procedure to be followed?
Wherever voters have indicated a further preference, transfers will be made in accordance with the same formula as is used for the transfer of a primary surplus: the surplus is divided by the number of transferable votes, multiplied by the number of papers in each continuing candidate's sub.parcel.
The effect will be the same as in the distribution of a primary surplus: in the simpler system the transfer of a proportion of the available votes, the transfer of all of them at a reduced value if the senatorial rules are used.
In the latter case the outcome can be curious indeed.
Bill Craig, we recall, had a surplus of 1,118.07 after receiving from Paisley's surplus 3,813 papers each revalued at 0.39.
Now these papers must be re-revalued.
In accordance with the  formula the surplus of 1,118.07 is divided by 3,813, so that 0.29 becomes the value of each of the papers transferred from Craig to other candidates.
If the patient reader is not surfeited by all this playing with numbers he may be entertained by a calculation of the "expenditure" of a vote originally given to Paisley with a second preference for Bill Craig and a third for some other candidate.
Of the single unitary voyage, worth 1.00,0.61 will have contributed to the election of Paisley, 0.10 will have contributed to the election of Craig, and 0.29 can pass to a third candidate; and should that candidate be consequently elected with a transferable surplus, the 0.29 of a vote can, down-valued yet again, pass to yet a fourth candidate.
If the senatorial rules had not been used the effect would of course have been essentially the same.
Out of every 100 votes given to Paisley 61 would have contributed to his election and ten to Craig's election, leaving 29 that could have been further transferred.
The arithmetic cannot be faulted — and may well be judged too clever by half.
Bill Craig's cognomen Jas was elected thanks to the accumulation, in fourteen successive stages of the count after the first, of 1,246.83 votes plus 297.25 plus 4.75 plus 1.75 plus 111.25 plus 15.47 plus 13.79 plus 975.73 plus 15.26 plus 219.03 plus 2.39 plus 2.00 plus 305.65 plus 747.00.
Some advocates of the STV present the senatorial rules as an indispensable feature of the system.
Others mention them only in passing or, like the Alliance Commission's Report on Electoral Reform, not at all.
In practice a decision is obviously inescapable: to use or not to use?
If not, the fairness of an election may be suspect; but to use the senatorial rules is to add a further complication to a system whose misguided ingenuity can in any case scarcely fail to give rise to misunderstandings and doubts about the way in which it works.
Misunderstandings and doubts
It is, for instance, not altogether easy to write about preferential voting without conveying however unintentionally the  impression that all the preferences which are expressed will be effective.
Some voters no doubt entertain the same misapprehension.
True, the STV may as we have just seen be broken down into unpredictable fractions if the senatorial rules are applied.
When that happens the fractions will add up to one single vote, and one only.
Nor in the counting-room is this "super-vote" at all likely, as one enthusiast has written, to "literally whizz back and forth" .
In the first place, it will be transferred only if it has been given previously to a candidate of higher preference now elected with a surplus or eliminated.
Secondly, it will go, in accordance with the voter's intention, to his next-preference candidate, or to put it more accurately — since it cannot go to a candidate already elected or eliminated — to his next available preference.
Thus there can be a world of difference between a preference that is stated and a preference that is effective.
My effective vote could be my first preference vote, in which case all my other preferences are null and void.
It could be my fifth-preference vote, but only if my first, second, third and fourth preferences have become for whatever reason inoperative and worthless.
It will in any event be one vote, and in no way can I make it count for P and Q and R and S and T, or even just for P and Q.
What, then, of the oft-repeated claim that the STV enables voters to vote for a coalition or an alliance?
They can, it is suggested, "by voting 1, 2, 3…for candidates of Party A and then going on to those of Party B…show that they consider these parties have much in common and should work together" .
To do that they would actually need to have two effective votes.
What a voter is saying when he gives his first-preference vote to a particular candidate of a particular party is, "I want this candidate, of this party, to be elected" .
If he gives his second- or lower-preference vote to a candidate of a different party, he is saying, "This is the candidate I want to see elected, IF for any reason my first- or any other higher-preference vote does not count" .
What he can't be saying if he understands the system is, "1 want to vote effectively both for my first-preference candidate and for my second or any lower preference" .
That may be what he'd like to say, but the single preferential vote makes it impossible.
In practice the resolute  supporter of Party A is not likely when he lists his preferences to be thinking primarily of any eventual cooperation between his party and Party B. His chief concern will be the success of as many as possible of Party A's candidates, and it will be to all of them that he gives his higher preferences.
He may then express lower preferences — faute de mieux by definition — for candidates of Party B. But that will by no means necessarily imply any wish for a Party A/Party B coalition.
A vote for a Party B candidate may simply indicate, with no ulterior motive, a wish to see that candidate elected — once all of the Party A candidates have been either elected or eliminated.
It may be a tactical vote against candidates of Party C.
Two parties presenting themselves as an alliance will, it is true, fare better than if they campaign separately.
In a number of elections in the Irish Republic both Fine Gael and Labour, its much weaker partner, have benefited thus: each has received votes transferred from the other as being surplus to the quota of candidates elected or, much more commonly, as being useless to candidates eliminated.
But voters whose preferences have been distributed between these two parties will have been doing no more than indicate acceptable alternatives, of which the basic pattern must have been, "Let that candidate of Party B have my vote IF and only IF my higher preference for this candidate of Party A has not been effective" .
These voters will not — they cannot — have been "voting for a coalition" .
What is no more than a side effect of the operation of preferential voting is misrepresented by the propagandists as the consequence of purposeful calculation.
Two other dubious elements in STV theorizing that call for clarification are the possibility of self-contradictory preferences and the pros and cons of "plumping" .
 "A lower preference cannot count against a higher preference" , say the pundits.
True, if understood to relate to candidates as persons: my third preference for Brawny can never count against my first preference for Beefy.
In political elections, however, candidates are not just persons, they stand for parties, and in political terms a lower preference can count against a higher preference in some circumstances.
If the Fruity Party fields three candidates in a constituency election; if I give my first preference to  Apple and second to Banana; if I give my third preference not to Cherry but to Hazel of the Nutty Party; and if finally, that third preference becomes an effective vote, it will unquestionably be a vote against the Fruity Party that I was supporting with my first and second preferences.
Nor, incidentally, will there be any point in my arguing that I have voted for Hazel on personal grounds and with no political intention: Hazel is a Nutty Party candidate and will if elected accept that Party's whip.
Suppose on the other hand that as a thoroughly loyal supporter of the Fruity Party I give all of my first three preferences to all of its three candidates — to Cherry as well as to Apple and Banana.
Suppose I stop there, even though I could express as many preferences as there are candidates.
Suppose, in other words, that I "plump" .
Will that be to the Fruity Party's advantage?
 "Yes" , say some voices, "No" , say others.
The argument in favour of plumping looks at first sight convincing enough: in the later stages of the count your own party will stand a chance of benefiting from the transferred lower preferences expressed by supporters of other parties, whilst those parties will not benefit from the transferred lower preferences of your own supporters since they won't have expressed any.
But this is to forget that no lower preference can become effective unless all higher preferences have become ineffective.
After I have given my first three preferences to Apple, Banana and Cherry my fourth preference, if I express one, will count only if Apple, Banana and Cherry have been either elected or eliminated.
They will no longer be in the running.
There is nothing more I can do to help them, nor can they collect any low-preference votes that may have been given to them by voters whose higher-preference votes have been given to candidates of other parties.
My own fourth- or lower-preference vote may conceivably affect the outcome of any contest between continuing candidates of other parties: it can have no effect on the fate of candidates of my own.
A party may reasonably ask its supporters to give to all of its candidates all of their higher preferences: it has no good reason to tell them to refrain from expressing further preferences.
Yet in Malta, in Northern Ireland and especially in the Republic that is what has often been requested or demanded by party organizers and  by candidates.
Have they really understood how the STV works?
If not they — and the voters — must surely be forgiven.
How one Teachta Dala (TD) was elected by the STV
Whatever criticisms may be made of the STV there is no denying that it has proved viable in its own fashion in twenty-two general elections in the Republic of Ireland.
In February 1987 it served to elect Ruari Quinn (Labour) in the four-member Dublin South-East constituency.
He was one of sixteen candidates: four Fianna Fail, three Fine Gael, two Workers' Party, one Labour, one Progressive Democrat, one Green Alliance, one Sinn Fein and three Independents.
One candidate, the outgoing Taoiseach and the then leader of Fine Gael, was a cert.
He was elected at the first count, Ruari Quinn at the fifteenth.
It happened as follows.
(After their first mention candidates will be designated by the first letter(s) of their surnames.)
Quinn began with 3.480 votes, less than half of the quota, 7,655.
At the second count he got 26 more votes, transferred from the surplus of Fitzgerald (FG), elected.
At the third, one more transferred from Clarke (Ind).
eliminated.
At the fourth, nine more, transferred from Hyland (Ind), eliminated, who had had votes transferred to her from two other candidates, F and Cl.
At the fifth, 19 more transferred from Brennan (Ind), eliminated, who had had votes transferred to him from three other candidates, F, Cl and H.
At the sixth, 64 more transferred from Crilly (WP), eliminated, who had had votes transferred to him from four other candidates, F, Cl, H and B.
At the seventh, 72 more transferred from O'Snodaigh (SF), who had had votes transferred to him from three other candidates, Cl, B and Cr.
By now Q had 3,671 votes.
At the eighth count he received 42 more, transferred from Egan (PG), eliminated, who had had voted transferred to him from five other candidates, F, H, B, Cr and O'S.
At the ninth count 418 more transferred from Mullarney (GA), eliminated, who had had votes transferred to her from seven other candidates, F, Cl, H, B, Cr, O'S and E.
At the tenth count, 104 more transferred from Ryan (FF), eliminated, who had had votes transferred to him from seven other candidates.
F, H, B, Cr, O'S, E and M. 
At the eleventh count, 839 more transferred from Smith (WP), eliminated, who had had votes transferred to him from nine other candidates, F, Cl, H, B, Cr, O'S, E, M and R.
At the twelfth count, 170 more transferred from McAleese (FF), eliminated, who had had votes transferred to her from nine other candidates, F, H, B, Cr, O'S, E, M, R and S.
At the thirteenth count, 16 more transferred from the surplus of Brady (FF), elected, who had had votes transferred to him from eleven other candidates, F, Cl, H, B, Cr, O'S, E, M, R, S and McA.
At the fourteenth count, 876 more transferred from Doyle (FG), eliminated, who had had votes transferred to him from twelve other candidates, F, Cl, H, B, Cr, O'S, E, M, R, S, McA and B.
Finally, at the fifteenth count, Q had 1,704 voted transferred to him from the surplus of McDowell (PD), elected, who had had votes transferred to him from twelve other candidates, F, H, B, Cr, O'S, E, M, R, S, McA, B and D.
Having received a total of 4,360 transferred votes — more than the 3,480 first-preference votes he began with — Quinn now had in all 7,840, 165 in excess of the quota.
No doubt he took his seat in the Dail arrayed in a coat of many colours and of many shreds and patches.
Far from being a lunatic fantasy, the foregoing rigmarole is simply a true account of the process by which, without the additional aggravation of those senatorial rules, one member of the Dail was elected.
A sensible process?
 "If you believe that you will believe anything" .
In Ruari Quinn's constituency 38,270 valid votes were cast.
In order to arrive at his election and the election in passing of two other candidates, it was necessary to transfer 113 parcels of ballot papers, involving altogether 16,397 movements of votes.
After all that toil and trouble, the outcome was the same as it is more often than not in a constituency of the Republic — the same, that is to say, as if not a single vote had been transferred: the candidates elected were those who, on the showing of the very first count, had the greatest number of first-preference votes.
In the February I 987 general election the fifteen counts required in the Dublin South-East constituency were not notably exceptional.
One constituency required 17 counts, seven required 13, three required 12.
In the total of 41 constituencies the average number of TDs to be elected was 4.05, and the average number of  counts was 8.56.
Out of the 165 members elected only 25 reached the quota thanks to first-preference votes alone.
The other 140 had to rely in varying degrees on transferred votes to provide them with a quota or something approaching it.
As the number of counts increases the more fortunate of the continuing candidates are to be observed making their bizarre progress to victory by acquiring, like Ruari Quinn, miscellaneous parcels of votes of anything but first preference.
Their election seems in the end to owe more to the system than to the voters.
It certainly owes nothing to any rational assessment of electoral support.
From further and more systematic study of elections in the Republic of Ireland much else can be learned about the operation of the STV — and nothing reassuring, as the following pages will show.
THE STV IN IRELAND
EVIDENCE AND CONCLUSIONS
I: CANDIDATES, VOTERS,
REPRESENTATIVES, THE LEGISLATURE
The "otherness" of the Republic of Ireland and its politics needs no emphasis.
Its two major parties scarcely deserve to be called political.
No serious ideological differences distinguish Fianna Fail, by far the stronger, from Fine Gael.
Both originated in a split in the nationalist movement of the early 1920s about the acceptability of the 1921 treaty with Britain that set up the Irish Free State.
Now fading, memories of "old, unhappy, far-off things, I And battles long ago" have until recently continued to determine party loyalties.
Fianna Fail and Fine Gael have appealed to the electorate at large, regardless of any socioeconomic considerations.
Significantly they have no political labels.
Fianna Fail means "Soldiers of Destiny" , Fine Gael is "the Tribe of the Gaels" , and indeed "tribal" has aptly characterized allegiance to both parties.
A third, Labour, has always been an "also ran" , attracting less than 10% of the popular vote in the last five general elections.
In February 1987 it secured only 6.4% — less than the 11.8% won by the Progressive Democrats, a new party whose emergence seemed at that time to betoken the awakening of a new and more specifically political consciousness among Irish voters.
The United Kingdom electorate in June 1987 numbered just over 43 million, the Irish electorate in February 1987 was just under 2.5 million.
For every MP there were about 66,500 voters, for every TD about 15,000.
Irish constituencies are mostly rural or semi-rural.
It cannot be supposed, then, that the STV would work in the United Kingdom in precisely the same ways as it does in Ireland.
However, it is used elsewhere for parliamentary elections only in Malta, Tasmania and Australia (for the Senate), so that Ireland is obviously the most accessible and relevant source of  evidence about its operation.
This evidence suggests that were the STV to be adopted in the United Kingdom it would have effects broadly similar to those it has in Ireland, and rather different from those proclaimed by its British advocates.
 "Voters choose, not the party" 
Thus, they assert that the STV "puts the electors face to face with the candidates without interposing the party machine between them" .
This is one of the most cherished articles of the STV creed, and it is nonsense.
Nonsense, because almost without exception the candidates themselves will have been selected by that supposedly indifferent party machine.
Apart from a few independents and a handful of dissidents the only candidates among whom the elector can choose will be those that the parties have seen fit to put before him.
As inevitable as it is obvious, this is the first limitation of the voter's freedom of choice that figures so prominently in STV propaganda.
Examination of the ways in which candidates are selected in Ireland and votes for them solicited will show that this putative liberty is in practice still more narrowly restricted.
The seniority factor
Of the considerations governing the selection of constituency candidates by one of the major Irish parties the most cogent could be called the "seniority factor" .
In other words the candidates most likely to be nominated if they so wish will be those who were nominated and became TDs at the previous general election.
A few may be ruled out because they have incurred their party s displeasure.
Most will have taken care not to do that.
 "Their motto is" What I have I hold", and this possessiveness is exacerbated by rivalry with party running-mates.
They may even try to ensure that they do not have any who are popular enough to filch "their" votes.
They do not like by-elections, for in them a candidate of  their own party may, win or lose, find the opportunity to display himself so advantageously as to become in the next general election a fearsome competitor.
If TDs generally can confidently expect to be re-nominated, many of them can also and no less confidently expect to be reelected.
The received doctrine is that no seat is safe in an STV election.
The seats of some TDs have in fact proved to be very safe indeed.
In Carlow-Kilkenny Patrick Crony held a seat from 1948 to 1969.
His son Kieran then succeeded him and retained his seat there until 1989 when he did not seek re-election.
Dick Barry was a Cork East TD from 1953 to 1981.
Richard Corish held a seat in Wexford from 1921 until his death in 1945.
His son Brendan then inherited the seat and kept it until his retirement in 1982.
In the United Kingdom an MP wanting to retain his seat is usually re-adopted as a candidate.
So he would be under the STV, and in many constituencies his re.adoption would be practically as it is now a guarantee of his return to Westminster.
The locality factor
A second consideration affecting a constituency party's choice of candidates could be called the "locality factor" .
Candidates tend in Ireland to be voted for by electors who know them, and they must be selected with this in mind.
They need to have a firm local base.
In a rural constituency it can be some small town; in the ten constituencies of Dublin, a suburb.
The requisite coverage can often be provided at least in part by the effect of the seniority factor.
For instance each of two long-serving TDs may have strong and reliable support in one third of their constituency.
In that case it will be judged necessary to seek a running-mate whose popularity will attract votes in the other third.
The elaboration of tactics of this kind is regarded as indispensable in the planning of any election campaign.
In Britain similarly parties would have to give careful attention to the locality factor.
A five-member constituency could have about 330,000 voters, widely dispersed in rural and semi-rural areas, and in cities not all living in close and homogeneous  proximity.
One thing is certain: no constituency would form what the Alliance Report glibly called "a natural community" .
Since all communities are man-made, no such entity exists, and the chances are small indeed that any community properly so called will coincide with any pragmatically contrived constituency.
The Alliance Report proposed a five-member constituency embracing the present three City of Leicester constituencies together with Harborough and Rutland.and-Melton in the County.
None of these five constituencies is itself anything like an authentic community, and the notion that the two County constituencies could be thought of as parts of the same community as the three City constituencies is laughable.
Anyone who supposes this case to be exceptional should try to reconcile the community of which he or she is genuinely a member with the constituency in which he or she now votes, and then remember that an STV constituency would be three, four, five or more times larger.
If this is a digression, it is not irrelevant.
It serves to emphasize that an STV constituency would include many distinct and disparate localities — more in Britain than in Ireland, and far more than could be covered by parties in the thorough Irish style.
Yet some coverage would have to be attempted, and candidates would have to be chosen with regard to their capacity to attract votes not simply throughout the whole constituency but also from specific localities within it.
Intra-party discord
No long experience of membership of a constituency party is necessary to enable one to guess that the selection of Irish candidates does not always proceed smoothly.
Transmuted into the reality of flesh and blood the seniority factor and the locality factor not infrequently give rise — and I borrow here the language of on-the-spot Irish witnesses — to factionalism, bargaining, lobbying and infighting, degenerating on occasion into bitter wrangles, internecine feuds and even physical violence.
At the obvious root of this discord lie personal ambitions fostered or thwarted by cliques of activists from the local branches involved in the selection of  candidates.
In recent years the head offices of Fianna Fail and Fine Gael have taken steps to increase their influence on this process, and have aroused the resentment of local favourites whose chances of nomination have been jeopardised by this "interference" .
Sometimes disagreement, in spite of attempts to conceal it, will become so public as to prejudice a party's hopes of electoral success.
Occasionally a party is defied, and a rejected and disgruntled postulant insists on standing as an independent.
Open conflict between candidates of the same party, approved but still rivals, may continue even after the election campaign has begun.
A candidate will be accused of canvassing for votes on another's territory, or of fighting the election on his own behalf and without so much as a mention of his running-mates or even of his party.
In short it appears that the selection of candidates under the STV does not do much for party harmony.
Doubtless we should manage things better over here?
The numerical factor
Besides the seniority factor and the locality factor, and to some extent coinciding with them, is a third which influences the selection of candidates: the "numerical factor" .
To fix on the right number of candidates to be fielded by a constituency party is an art, not an exact science.
A basic pattern can nevertheless be discerned.
Though variations attributable to local circumstances are frequent, the number of candidates tends to be equal to the number of seats being defended plus one.
In fielding that additional candidate a party may be hoping to win one more seat.
(It will entertain no hope of winning more than one because the STV, unlike the British system, does not magnify the effect of "swings" in electoral opinion).
But if the additional candidate is not elected, he will still have been useful to his party provided that he has been able to collect votes which on his elimination are transferred to stronger running-mates still in need of them.
In any case the overriding question for a constituency party is not how many candidates it might field but how few it must.
STV propagandists let it be understood that each  major party will put up a candidate for every seat.
That may happen (though it usually does not) where there are three to be filled, is much less likely if there are four, and almost unheard-of if there are five.
No party can hope to win all of the seats in a constituency, even if these are as few as three.
The reasonable ambition is to win and keep two out of three, two or three out of four, and two, three or exceptionally four out of five.
So realism suggests a limit on the number of candidates, and if in some Irish constituencies there are a dozen or even a score the reason is that they include candidates of small or perhaps minuscule parties besides more or less cranky independents: the two major parties are not responsible.
As well as realism, tactical prudence restricts the number of candidates they present.
One might suppose that the greater that number, the greater also the number of votes a party ought to receive.
But putting up more candidates increases the danger that each of them will contend as an individual rather than as a member of a team: it makes the campaign harder to co-ordinate.
Moreover — and this is generally regarded as the decisive argument — the greater will be the number among them who will be eliminated and make their votes available for transfer.
With every such operation the greater the risk becomes that "leakages" will occur, that is to say that lower.preference votes will pass to candidates of other parties.
Conversely the fewer the candidates, the fewer will be the eliminations and the transfers, and the stronger the probability that such votes as are transferred will stay with the party, which will thus come closer to deriving the maximum benefit from its potential support.
Were the STV to be adopted in Britain, the seniority factor, the locality factor and the numerical factor would all have to be taken into account as they are in Ireland in the selection of candidates.
They would all affect the voter's decisions, and whether he was aware of it or not they would all constrain his freedom of choice.
The "balanced slate" 
The STV's evangelists, however, proclaim that under their system the selection of candidates is determined by a single and  quite different factor, which (they say) actually enlarges the voter's freedom of choice.
This they call the "balanced slate" , and their insistent message is that whereas under our present system a vote for a party is a vote for just one candidate regardless of his precise political stance, the operation of the STV would allow a party, or rather oblige it, to put up a spread of candidates embracing and representing all the factions it supposedly includes.
In their more extravagant flights of fancy the choice thus offered to the voter is extended to cover specific heads of policy.
A pundit of the Electoral Reform Society, noting that the French Socialist manifesto produced for the 1981 general election envisaged twenty-one separate reforms, has claimed that the STV would have enabled voters to show which of them they approved of.
Just how is not explained, nor could it be: one single vote, and twenty-one Socialist candidates in every constituency, each labelled as a supporter of one particular reform?
More sober advocates are content to imply that in Britain a Conservative constituency party would field a wet, a damp and a dry candidate, whilst Labour candidates would range from deep crimson to shell pink, and the Liberal Democrats would presumably run at least one ex-Liberal and one ex-SDP candidate.
Such is the notion uncritically entertained in the Alliance Report: competing candidates of the same party would make clear their differences on policy issues, and on the balanced slate so presented to him the voter would pick and choose.
A fine theory!— and that's all it is.
In June 1976 the Hansard Society Commission on Electoral Reform observed that "certainly in Ireland there is no conscious attempt to produce a slate of candidates across the political spectrum within a party" .
Perhaps no such spectrum exists?
Be that as it may, the Commission went on to say that it was "not fully convinced" that the balanced slate would ever make its appearance in Britain either.
To offer an explanation of this view doubtless seemed unnecessary, for it must be obvious to anyone who has even a rudimentary grasp of the  exigencies of electoral campaigning.
Among such factions as may exist in a constituency party one is likely to be dominant, and to imagine that it would consent to the nomination of candidates not numbered among its adherents is scarcely realistic.
Suppose that, however improbably, a balanced slate could nevertheless be agreed on in one party.
It is a safe bet that the other parties in contention would not make the same mistake.
For mistake it would certainly be.
The paramount requirement for a party fighting an election is the appearance (if not the reality) of unity.
Is it possible to forget the unhappy consequences for the Alliance of the Liberal discord male manifest at the Eastbourne Conference of 1986?
Because the winning of seats under the STV depends more often than not on the transfer of votes from one candidate to another of the same patty, it is particularly important that they should campaign unanimously.
They must stick to the party line, and their Bible must be its manifesto.
Or do the advocates of the STV imagine that each candidate would write his own?
The consequences would be fascinating, not to say comic.
Doughty would admit that in order to safeguard the welfare state income tax would have to go up.
Deadman would insist there would be no need for that.
Dandy would be sure it could be reduced.
A rich vein of disagreement indeed, offered for eager exploitation by opponents!
The party faithful might be willing to put up with such dissonance among their candidates.
The propagandists go so far as to assume, even to assert, that it would not result in any splitting of the party vote: in other words that votes transferred from Dandy or Deadman or Doughty would go to another of these three running-mates and not elsewhere.
Perhaps; but a typical reaction of the electorate at large could be more confidently predicted: "If your candidates can't agree among themselves we're not going to vote for any of them" .
Preferential voting and the popularity stakes in Ireland
Candidates having been selected, and with no reference to that imaginary balanced slate, how does the Irish voter choose between them?
 "There can be no doubt" according to one academic authority "that [he]displays a highly sophisticated grasp" of the working of the system ".3 On the contrary: there can be very great doubt whether voters in general , in Ireland or elsewhere, are competent to display" a highly sophisticated grasp"of anything  at all .
In the Irish general election of February 1987 the average number of candidates in the fifteen five-member constituencies was 14.3.
Overall, little more than half of them were serious candidates put up by Fianna Fail, Fine Gael, Labour and the Progressive Democrats, and on the ballot paper they were not listed for convenience of identification in party groups; the other candidates were outsiders.
Many voters must be confused by a list of twenty or fifteen or even ten names.
The question is not whether they can fill in a simple series of figures, but whether they fully understand the implications of the choices they thus make.
Some simplify their task by voting alphabetically.
In the November 1982 election the percentage of candidates having surname initials in the first four letters of the alphabet was surprisingly high: 32.9, but of the candidates elected it was higher still: 38.6.
In February 1987 the corresponding figures were 28.6% for all candidates and 35.5% for candidates elected.
It has been reckoned that in the Northern Ireland Assembly election of 1973 eight seats out of 78 were won thanks to alphabetical voting.
This method — if it can be properly so called— is usually applied not to the full range of candidates but to the candidates of the voter's favourite party.
To be listed first among these may according to one estimate confer in the Republic an advantage averaging nearly a thousand first-preference votes.
If some voters' choices are determined by the lottery of surnames, others are channelled by specific guidance.
The two major parties often advise their supporters how to distribute preferences among their candidates.
The usual aim is to carve up a constituency in such a way that first-preferences will be spread evenly between candidates whose chances of election are judged to be good.
This should ensure that none of them is eliminated in an early count and thus deprived of the benefit of a surplus transferred from any more popular running-mate.
But it need hardly be said that voters sometimes disappoint candidates and campaign managers.
In particular, they indulge in cross-party voting.
A party's most loyal supporters give all of their higher preferences to all of its candidates.
less reliable supporters give away one or more of these to candidates of other parties who are better known to them.
It has been calculated that in general elections from 1922 to 1977 inclusive  average "leakages" amounted to roughly one-fifth of Fianna Fail's potential votes, a quarter of Fine Gael's and one third of Labour's.
Cross-party voting implies self-contradiction.
A voter who gives a first-preference vote and a second-preference vote to Fianna Fail candidates and a third-preference vote to a Fine Gael candidate is really asking with his first two choices that Fianna Fail should win the election and with his third that Fine Gael should prevail.
Awareness of this inconsistency is apparently, for a substantial part of the Irish electorate, not comprehended in that "highly sophisticated grasp" of the operation of the STV.
Widespread though it is, cross-party voting is an aberration.
In general voters in Ireland, like voters in all democracies, express primarily a choice in favour of one political party.
The additional opportunity provided by the STV to rank that party's candidates in an order of preference is according to its advocates the system's chief merit.
It is on the contrary a very grave flaw, latent but pernicious in its effects.
Since candidates of the same party cannot afford to differentiate themselves in political terms what they have to compete for is popularity.
That has to be bought, and the price to be paid is exorbitant.
Popularity means in the first place being known.
An Irish TD will probably have been born in his constituency and reside there.
He may well have attracted public attention initially by excelling in hurley or Gaelic football, and have achieved some prominence as a county councillor.
He will attach great importance to face-to-face meetings and so will his constituents.
He will be on first-name terms with many of them, and if he fails to contact his supporters individually in the course of an election campaign he will risk losing their votes.
These extraordinarily close ties between TD and constituents are not spontaneous or disinterested.
The mutual understanding is that they give him their votes, and he gives them his services, always seeking to prove that he is at the very least as obliging and as diligent as the other"TDs and would-be TDs in his constituency.
The Dungarvan Leader once commended a candidate "with a record of achievement" in these revealing terms: "He has consistently fought in the Waterford County Council (of which body he has been a member for many years) for amenities for the town, and it was thanks to his representations that the long-suffering residents of the old road had a footpath provided in front of their homes to prevent flooding.
Also of (sic) an extra light at the entrance to Chapel Street and at Tuckey's corner, and the provision of a public convenience which, through no fault of his, has not yet been erected.
let us hope the residents of Tallow will be mindful of this".
It goes without saying that the TD must hold regular surgeries, or in the euphemistic Irish expression "hear confessions" which will of course turn out to be requests for assistance.
One petitioner wants a grant to repair the leaky roof of his house, another a grant to clear the stream running past his farm, another wants a Council job and a fourth and a fifth want help with social welfare applications.
Long experience has taught many Irishmen that they will not get from authorities national and local the benefits and services to which they consider themselves entitled without the kindly intervention of some influential personage.
The TD knows the right people at all levels of the bureaucracy and can pull innumerable strings.
In studies of contemporary Irish politics he is variously described as a broker, an intermediary, an ombudsman, a patron, an errand-boy, an intercessor, an adviser, an advocate, a consumer representative and a welfare officer.
Activity in these roles absorbs most of his time and energy: it will win him the popularity essential to his reelection.
If he compares unfavourably with his rivals he will be rejected.
If he does really well he can hope for a bonus of cross-party votes: never mind Patrick's party label, we've known him for a long time, we like him and he's been very helpful.
The popular "ID is unquestionably a" good constituency TD"— just what the STV enthusiasts want and just what in Ireland the STV does indeed provide.
But is being a good constituency TD the same as being a good TD?
Preferential voting and the popularity stakes in Britain
What would British voters make of the STV, and what effect would it have on MPs?
As in Ireland some voters would find the ballot paper confusing.
The careless, the not-very-bright and the indifferent (if they took the trouble to vote at all) would record preferences with a similar lack of understanding of their implications.
There would certainly be some alphabetical voting, and some guidance about the spreading of preferences would probably be given and accepted.
Some cross-party voting could be expected, though less than in the Republic, the differentiation of our political parties being much clearer.
For J.S.Mill voting was a civic duty of high seriousness: a man must give his vote "according to his best and most conscientious opinion of the public good" .
Few are the voters whose minds work on this exalted plane.
More are likely to be ill informed, to take little interest in politics, and perhaps to give rather less thought to the casting of a vote than to the marking of a pools coupon.
If the public were schooled to discriminate between the germane and the irrelevant, the authentic and the phoney, and the reality and the appearance, nine-tenths at least of the advertising industry would be out of work.
If the electorate were even moderately sophisticated there would be no point in contriving in the course of an election campaign all those gimmicky photo opportunities for leading politicians in which the issue is nothing and the image is everything.
Yet however suspect may be the capacity of electors in general to vote responsibly and intelligently their right to make political choices must in a democracy be respected.
For voting as they do they have reasons sufficient in their eyes and not to be called in question.
To choose between candidates as representatives of political parties is one thing: to choose between them as persons is another.
Then, the decisive factor could not fail to become what it is in Ireland: just popularity.
Surprisingly, supporters of the STV see no objection.
There is a preponderant objection: popularity is worthless as an index of quality.
Selling more than four million copies a day, the Sun is our most popular "newspaper" .
Under the STV popularity is nevertheless what our MPs would have to go all out for if they  wanted to be re-elected.
A personal relationship between them and their constituents is commonly taken to be an intrinsic and laudable feature of British parliamentary representation.
Its existence is assumed.
Yet for most people their MP is not exactly a conspicuous person.
A survey conducted nearly twenty years ago found that less than half of the electorate even knew his name.
If that ignorance still exists it would have to be dispelled.
The normal value of an MP's personality and good name has been estimated at some 1,500 votes.
It would have to be made to count for far more, and by means familiar to Irish TDs.
As an advocate of the STV has observed, if an MP is "forced by the system to spend his working hours worrying about the number of first-preference votes he will get at the next election, and many of his sleeping hours dreaming about them, he or she will work harder than ever for constituents'" 
Working harder for constituents individually would mean more surgeries, not to be easily provided if they were to cover the large constituencies necessitated by the STV.
The system would, it is claimed, almost guarantee that a constituent would be able to consult an MP of his own political persuasion.
How far might either  constituent or MP have to travel in order to make such a consultation possible?
About the necessity and effectiveness of surgeries there can in any case be reservations.
Many of the matters discussed in them are trivial.
Many could and should be dealt with by local authorities and councillors and by such agencies as citizens advice bureaux, welfare rights centres, the social services and voluntary aid organizations.
by no means all of the interventions made by MPs on behalf of constituents are successful or deserve to be.
But more significant in the present context is the fact that if an MP wins a reputation for trying to be helpful, more and more people will turn to him for help.
That is precisely the calculation that would be made by an MP elected under the STV.
It is to him that the most certain benefit of holding more surgeries would accrue: they would give proof of availability and sympathetic concern and increase the number of his personal contacts.
The new-style MP would have to work harder for his constituents collectively as well as individually.
At Westminster he would have to press ever more insistently demands for improvements in local hospitals and schools, housing and roads.
In the role of public-relations officer and contact man he would need to be ever more energetic in promoting commercial and industrial interests in his constituency.
More even than our present MPs he would have to ensure that any success he might achieve was widely reported.
Publicity would be of paramount importance in his quest for popularity.
It would require his more frequent presence in the constituency, presence all the harder to contrive of course in proportion to distance from Westminster.
We are told that"the reason why constituencies of about five members are recommended is that they form communities [?]where electors may be expected to have sufficient personal knowledge of the candidates'.
For some 330,000 electors to acquire anything like that "sufficient personal knowledge" , self-advertisement would have to become the MP's chief preoccupation.
He would need to be continually finding opportunities to put himself on display to the populace: walkabouts, tours of business premises and factories and farms, appearances in pubs and clubs, visits to colleges and hospitals and homes for the elderly, attendances at all sorts of social functions and ceremonies — the list could be endless.
Exploitation of the press, radio and television would be more than ever indispensable, as would awareness that image matters not in a figurative sense only: votes can be won and lost by hair-styles, complexions, teeth and apparel.
In all the antics to which our honourable member would resort to secure the publicity and the popularity needed under the STV to get himself re-elected he would be contributing to the personalization and the trivialization of politics of which the eighties saw the deplorable example set in high places.
With his well-rehearsed affability he would become all things to all men, always compliant to public opinion, fearful of offending it.
He might forfeit the respect of the fastidious few: that would not matter if he could win the votes of the many.
It is ironical that the father of the STV, Thomas Hare, recommended his system on the grounds among others that it would safeguard the most eminent parliamentarians from the risk of not being re-elected.
 "Every intelligent voter" in the country would avail himself of the opportunity proposed by Hare to enter their names on  the ballot paper.
This would guarantee "the perfect security of all the principal statesmen in the House from the effects of local or individual prejudices or enmities…[or]some accidental offence to a few individual members of a constituency, or some petty and miserable pique" .
Hare was concerned to protect the independence of some MPs at least.
After the many modifications subsequently made to his scheme, the STV as we know it would ensure the subservience of all of them.
Is this what is meant by the claim that its introduction "would dramatically improve the quality of representation" ?
The STV, the Dail and the House of Commons
Considering the poor reputation of the Dail whose members are elected by the STV that claim is truly astonishing.
In the course of a year it meets on about half as many days as the House of Commons and never on more than three days in a week.
Even when it is in session it devotes relatively little energy to the serious scrutiny and debate of government policy.
In this domain it serves, to use the unavoidable cliche, merely as a rubber stamp.
TDs are more preoccupied with trivialities.
Question time, which might be used to investigate major issues of general public interest, degenerates into a long series of requests for information about individual cases: 333 out of the 357 questions put to the Minister for Social Welfare in October and November 1983 fell into this category.
Worthy candidates for appointment to high ministerial office are in short supply: prestige and departmental responsibility bring TDs far less credit than service to their constituents.
Supplying that, they have time for very little else.
Debating parliamentary reform in the Dail early in 1983 they were complaining of being "almost totally engaged in working for their constituents" , "whistling with exhaustion under the sheer burden of constituency work" .
As almost all TDs are now willing to admit, the obligation inherent in the STV to compete for votes by looking after the interests of constituents forces them to give less than proper attention to their prime constitutional responsibility as legislators.
The quality of recruitment to the Dail is widely held to have deteriorated in recent years for the same reason.
How would the House of Commons be affected by the introduction of the STV?
No doubt it would be slow to change.
That it should be other than the great national forum for political debate and decision would at first be unthinkable.
Yet if Parliament would not sink overnight into the insignificance of the Dail, the STV would gradually exercise an insidious and in the end decisive effect on its proceedings and its authority.
Some present MPs think it has already "become all too easy to opt out of real responsibility at Westminster by immersion in constituency work" .
What is now a temptation would become a compulsion.
Elected by the STV an MP would soon find himself under the same necessity as his Irish counterpart to maximize his local popularity at all costs.
What machinations might not his rivals — other MPs and would-be MPs in his constituency — engage in behind his back if he allowed himself to be so absorbed in parliamentary affairs as to be negligent in the continuous wooing of his voters?
What would be the point of his striving for good repute in the House if in so doing he had to risk losing his seat?
Inevitably their constituencies would come to matter more to MPs than Parliament.
Scrutiny of policy and legislation would become less exacting; the government of the day would be less insistently called to account.
Concurrently the calibre of MPs would diminish with each new intake.
The STV theorists maintain that their system would result in the election of more members born and bred in their own constituency.
Such MPs would, it is true, know that territory better than any incoming outsider, and being known there would presumably get off to a flying start in the pursuit of popularity.
Unfortunately it is very likely that among the men and women best qualified by talent, temperament and experience to become MPs many would be put off by the conditions imposed by the STV on the winning and the retention of a seat.
Under the STV a candidate must compete not only with political opponents but also with candidates of his own party, and compete in a popularity contest which, commencing with his first election campaign, will have to last without remission for as long as he wishes to hold his seat.
That  would be quite unacceptable to good potential MPs who do not think much of popularity (their own or other people's) and would not demean themselves by deliberately setting out to acquire it.
The charge here made against the STV is, in short, that its adoption would lead to the devaluation of Parliament.
It would tie an MP too closely to his constituents.
It is only by putting some distance between himself and them that he can discharge his prime responsibility, which is to the country: decisions taken in the House of Commons affect all of us.
Parliament, said Burke, "is an assembly of one nation, with one interest, that of the whole; where, not local purposes, not local prejudices ought to guide, but the general good" .
Doubtless that is not so much a reality as an ideal — and one for which due respect is conspicuously lacking in the ethos of the STV.
II: PROPORTIONALITY
PR defined
What can the Irish experience teach us about the relationship between the STV and PR?
It will be useful to begin by being clear just what PR means.
According to I.S Mill it is"the first principle of democracy, representation in proportion to numbers…
No real democracy, nothing but a false show of democracy, is possible without it".
More explicitly, PR in the present context requires that in a legislature the distribution of seats to political parties shall be proportionate to the number of votes given to those parties.
If the votes are 50%, 30% and 20% for parties A, B and C respectively, then PR means that Party A must have 50% of the seats, Party B 30% and Party C 20% — or if not exactly those percentages, then percentages as close to them as is possible within the constraints of whatever system is being used.
A reminder of this basic definition is necessary because partisans of the STV often refer to PR in loose and impressionistic terms.
They fail to recognize that it must be founded on precise numbers of votes and of seats, and related to precisely defined entities, namely whole political parties.
They claim that the STV  can provide PR of shades of opinion — more frankly, differences of opinion — within political parties.
We have already seen how unlikely it is that any party would go before the electorate avowing such differences: an exhibition of disunity would be too damaging to its chances of success.
Suppose nevertheless that one party were so ill advised as to field candidates who would openly compete with each other in political terms.
let it be, for example, the Conservatives, imagined to be deliberately selecting wet, damp and dry candidates.
By what unmistakable tokens they would be generally identified as such is questionable: officially they would all be simply Conservatives.
However the voting might go in these circumstances there could be no PR of wet, damp and dry votes, because there would be no means of knowing how far these had been attracted by the candidates' presumed wetness, dampness or dryness.
The number of votes for wets, damps and  dries could be accurately counted and a proportionate entitlement of votes could be accurately calculated only if candidates had been distinctively labelled Wet Conservative, Damp Conservative or Dry Conservative.
The hypothesis is clearly absurd.
PR measures electoral support for indivisible political parties and cannot measure support for vaguely defined factions within them.
Nor, contrary to the assertions of some STV enthusiasts, can there be any PR that is indirect.
Their argument can be illustrated by assuming that in an STV constituency election the sole Green candidate is eliminated at the first count.
However, there is among the Conservative candidates one who is known to be particularly sympathetic to Green policies.
Green voters will (it is suggested) have given their second-preference votes to him, and thus secured his election.
They may now congratulate themselves on having obtained some parliamentary representation.
But it will be no more than second-best representation, and certainly not proportional representation.
Those Green voters will not have elected their own MP: they will merely have helped to elect one more Conservative MP.
By advocates of the STV the predominant role of political parties is constantly underestimated, even denied.
Their system "seeks to give effect to the wishes of every voter, whatever they may  be and whether they have anything to do with party or not" .
Are we in this fantasy being invited to vote for fairy godmothers?
Inasmuch as any of our wishes can be granted by decisions taken in Parliament they must inevitably have "something to do with party" , since practically all MPs will always belong to parties; even the rare free vote requires the consent of the party in power.
Any non-party candidate will have a very small chance of being elected and if, surprisingly, he is elected, he will have no more than a minute chance of exercising significant influence in the House.
PR realistically recognizes that parties provide the only channels through which the political verdict of the electorate can be expressed, that parties are indispensable to the formation of governments, and that what matters most in the outcome of a general election is not which candidates have been elected, but how many of this, that and the other party.
PR's sole concern is with the relationship between the number of votes each party has received and the number of seats it has been awarded.
The assessment of proportionality
Assessment of the accuracy of that relationship under the STV immediately raises the question which votes are to be counted: just first-preference votes, or transferred votes also?
There being no obvious and convincing way in which the latter can be brought into the reckoning, the practice adopted by disinterested psephologists and proponents of the STV alike is to count first-preference votes only.
This makes good sense.
First-preference votes are presumably the votes that have been most seriously considered.
They are the only ones certain to be counted in an election, for votes of lower preference are counted only when transfers have to be made.
They are the votes which, usually making the greatest contribution to a successful candidate's quota, are the most influential.
Yet as its name suggests the system's most distinctive feature is the transferability of votes, and since they are in fact transferred in large quantities it seems paradoxical to ignore them.
The interesting implication of disregarding them is that in so far as the STV can  operate and be judged as a PR system, it is not at all because it provides for transfers of votes, but because it is used in pluri-member constituencies in which candidates of more than one party can be voted for effectively.
Disproportionality in Irish constituencies
In STV constituencies electing three, four or five members better proportionality than in single-member constituencies can be expected, but it is very unlikely to be accurate proportionality.
Bach seat constitutes a pre-determined share of the total number: 25%, for instance, in a four-member constituency.
On the other hand the distribution of first-preference votes will be unpredictable and uneven.
Among ten candidates it might range from 21% of the total through 18, 16, 13, 11, 9, 5, 4 and 2 down to 1%.
Attempting to reconcile such figures as these with the fixed number of seats to be filled, the STV resorts as we know to the devices of transfers and quotas.
But transferred votes cannot be counted in assessing proportionality, and quotas themselves can contribute to anomalies: a quota of 25%, for example, will suffice to win 33.3% of the seats in a three-member constituency.
On occasion something approaching satisfactory proportionality is achieved.
In Donegal South-West in 1987 Fianna Fail with 58.2% of the first-preference votes won two of the three seats and Fine Gael with 29.8% won the other: fair enough, except that there could be no representation for the Workers' Party with 8.0%.
In general proportionality is awry.
A typical example — if any can properly be called typical when patterns of voting differ so widely — is provided by the 1987 election in Longford-Westmeath.
For 12.0% of the first-preference votes the Progressive Democrats won no seat, for 27.5% Fine Gael not unfairly won one, but Fianna Fail won the other three for only 57.6%.
Disproportionalities can sometimes appear almost freakish.
Three parties have been known to win one seat each in the same three-member constituency with first-preference votes of 19.1%, 30.3% and 50.5%.
Two seats out of three have been won for no more than 42.5% of the votes, and  two out of four for only 24.2%.
What these anomalies mean is that within one and the same constituency the price paid in first-preference votes for the election of a TD varies greatly.
Moreover the potential of all votes, whether of first or lower preference, varies between constituencies, because these differ considerably in magnitude (a term that usefully serves to denote the size of a constituency's electorate as distinct from the area it covers).
In the United States the Supreme Court ruled some twenty years ago that "the weight of a citizen's vote cannot be made to depend on where he lives" .
It does so depend in Britain, and in Ireland as well.
An STV constituency can to a limited extent have the number of its seats adjusted in accordance with its magnitude.
Nevertheless in 1987 Dublin North-East had one TD for every 12,712 electors and Dublin South-Central one for every 17,071.
These are not, however, the sort of figures most relevant to our present concern with proportionality.
More significant are the numbers of votes actually cast, since these enter into the calculation of the quota normally required for a candidate's election.
The smaller the quota, the greater the purchasing-power of a vote.
In 1987 a TD cost 11,563 votes in Cavan-Monaghan; in Dublin North-West, where the quota was 6,925, a TD was some 40% cheaper.
Disproportionality in the Dail
Defective proportionality at the constituency level is disconcerting but relatively unimportant.
How good is proportionality in Ireland at the national level which matters most?
Our first observation must be that to a gratifying extent the numerous anomalies in constituency results cancel themselves out when these are aggregated to give national totals of votes received and seats won by each party.
The STV's performance then appears in a much more favourable light.
Unquestionably the degree of proportionality it produces overall contrasts strikingly with the disproportionality of British general election results.
No Irish party could hope to win, as our own Conservatives did in 1987,58% of the seats for 42% of the votes.
In the Irish general election of 1989  PR might at first sight of the figures seem to have been provided with remarkably close approximation to perfect accuracy: A favourable impression would, however, be superficial and misleading.
As we shall see later, the distribution of seats to parties in this general election was in fact less than satisfactory, and the evidence from other general elections of the STV's unreliability as a PR system is abundant.
The Alliance Report recognized that the STV "will not on all occasions result in exact proportionality between first-preference votes and seats" .
To admit that it rarely will would have been more candid.
The relationship between votes and seats in Ireland has proved to be usually inaccurate, and inconsistent also.
The same percentage of votes (PV for short) in different elections has not resulted in the award of the same percentage of seats (PS).
In both 1981 and February 1982 the Fine Gael/Labour coalition had a PV of 46.4, but its PS fell from 48.2 to 47.0.
In 1981 and November 1982 Fianna Fail had almost identical PVs: 45.3,45.2, but its PSs were 47.0,45.2.
A decrease in PV has been curiously "rewarded" more than once by an increase in PS.
Fianna Fail's PV dropped from 47.7 in 1965 to 45.7 in 1969, whilst its PS went up from 50.3 to 51.7.
Similarly the Fine Gael/Labour opposition vote fell from 51.1 in 1969 to 48.8 in 1973, whilst its PS rose from 47.2 to 51.1.
Conversely, Fianna Fail's PV increased from 45.7 in 1969 to 46.2 in 1973, and its PS decreased from 51.7 to 47.5.
In two general elections the outcome was quite perverse.
In 1965 the opposition parties, Fine Gael and Labour, had a PV of 49.5, higher than Fianna Fail's at 47.7, but it was Fianna Fail that had a PS majority, 50.3.
The same sort of thing occurred in 1969.
The opposition parties had a PV of 51.1, higher than Fianna Fail's at 45.7; but Fianna Fail's PS was 51.7, again a majority.
So after both of these elections a government was formed which had less electoral support than the opposition.
PR indeed!
What happened twice could happen again, and there is a nightmare that should haunt the imagination of SN propagandists.
let them sweetly dream that in Britain the great day has come at last.
The necessary legislation has been enacted.
The new constituencies have been devised.
The new method of voting has been explained to the electorate.
All this, at vast expenditure of effort and of cash.
And now the first STV general election is being held, the voters in the polling booths are busily writing 1,2,3,4,5…instead of marking the customary X, and the sun is shining.
Next day all is gloom.
When the counting has been completed it is found that Party A (together with any actual or potential allies) has won 52% of the seats for 48% of the votes, whilst Party B (together with any actual or potential allies) has won 52% of the votes but only 48% of the seats.
Such an eventuality — which no one who had studied the results of Irish elections could suppose to be quite improbable — would put us back to February 1974, when Labour with 37.1% had fewer votes than the Conservatives with 37.9%, but with 301 seats won more than the Conservatives with 297; or to 1951, when the Conservatives with 48.0% had fewer votes than Labour with 48.8%, but with 321 seats won more than labour with 295.
How small parties are disadvantaged
If one great defect of the STV is failure to guarantee sufficiently accurate PR of major parties or combinations of parties, a second is its inherent tendency to provide less than their due share of representation for small parties.
For this, election by quota is basically responsible.
A quota — 25%, 20% or 16.7% in constituencies of three, four or five members respectively — is in effect a barrier, more or less formidable in proportion to the number of votes (not necessarily all of first preference) that a party can attract.
Because it can be sure of filling at least one quota, a big party can be sure of winning at least one seat.
A small party may get a substantial number of votes, but if they fall short of the quota it will not normally win a seat.
The disproportion between x votes and no seats is apparent.
If a small party is under-represented, it follows that some bigger party or parties will be over-represented.
They will receive an uncovenanted bonus of seats, especially if most constituencies return only three members and consequently have the quotas that are hardest to fill.
There were no less than 26 three-member constituencies in Ireland out of a total of 42 when Fianna Fail's PS exceeded its PV by 6.0 percentage points in 1969 and 6.2 in 1977.
In 1980 Irish constituencies had their boundaries and the number of their seats reviewed for the first lime by independent Constituency Commissioners.
They reduced the constituencies from 42 to 41 and increased the total of TDs from 148 to 166.
They reduced the three seat constituencies from 26 to 13, and increased the four-seaters from 10 to 13 and the five-seaters from six to 15.
The increase in the average number of TDs per constituency was small: from 3.52 to 4.05, but sufficient to ensure that no more bonuses as generous as those awarded to Fianna Fail in 1969 and 1977 would any longer be available.
In the next three general elections the largest bonus, which went to the Fine Gael/Labour alliance in November 1982, amounted to no more than 3.2 percentage points, and no other bonus exceeded 2.0.
However, larger bonuses were bestowed in 1987.
Fianna Fail then had a PV of 44.1 and a PS of 48.8.
Fine Gael had a PV of 27.1 and a PS of 30.7.
Thus for these two parties the total  difference between PV and PS was 8.3 percentage points.
In 1989 bonuses were smaller but still significant: 2.3 percentage points for Fianna Fail, 3.8 for Fine Gael, 6.1 altogether.
The Alliance Report, incidentally, suggested that under the STV in Britain the possible discrepancy between PV and PS would be "unlikely to exceed 3 or 4 percent" .
Bonuses are not wholly to be deplored.
If 5%, let us say, of the total of first-preference votes are given to minute parties and frivolous independent candidates, there is no good reason why they should secure even the minimal representation to which they might in strict theoretical proportionality be entitled.
There is no good reason why in these circumstances 100% of the seats should not be distributed among parties (and any serious independent candidates) which have together won 95% of the votes.
No good reason, that is to say, provided that the resultant marginal over-representation of those parties is fairly distributed between all of them.
It is so distributed in the more equitable West German electoral system: under the STV it is not.
Only the bigger parties are sure to receive the bonuses that provide them with over-representation.
Under-representation is the likely fate of small parties.
One can speak here only of strong probability, not of absolute certainty.
A small party will not necessarily fail to get its fair share of seats.
It may be lucky enough to win some seats without reaching the quota.
It may enjoy support not widely dispersed, but concentrated in certain constituencies.
It may benefit abnormally from transferred votes, as Labour has done in Ireland from 1973 onwards.
Thanks to its alliance with Fine Gael it has attracted many low-preference votes from that party's supporters.
It has thus fared better than a small party could expect, maintaining a PS almost equal to its PV and even on occasion slightly in excess of it.
The fact remains that because of election by constituency quota the odds are heavily against fair representation for a small party.
In the 1989 Irish general election whose results were tabulated earlier (p.42), the Workers' Party had a PV of 5.0%, its highest ever, but a PS of 4.2%.
More interesting for the British observer has been the lot of the Progressive Democrats, like the late Alliance  a new party competing with two older and stronger parties.
Fielding candidates for the first time in 1987, it had a PV of 11.8, but a PS of only 8.4.
Fair proportionality would have given it 19 or 20 seats: it actually won 14.
In relation to each other Fianna Fail, Fine Gael and Labour unusually happened in 1987 to be treated equitably: the number of first-preference votes per TD was 9,686 for Fianna Fail, 9,434 for Fine Gael, and 9,546 for Labour.
It was 15,042 for the Progressive Democrats.
By 1989 their challenge had faltered: their PV fell to 5.5.
Again, and like the Workers' Party in the same election, they were disadvantaged.
Their PS was 3.6, i.e. six actual seats instead of the nine that accurate PR would have given them: not a large difference, but important for a small party.
In determining how many seats such a party will win under the STV the lottery of transfers is especially momentous.
In 1987 only half of the Progressive Democrats' 14 TDs were elected on quotas made up of first-preference votes given to them or to party running-mates from whom they were transferred.
The other seven would not have been elected without the contribution of transferred votes originally given to candidates of other parties.
In 1989 only two of the Progressive Democrats' six TDs were elected by votes given exclusively to their party.
The other four needed the assistance of votes transferred from their competitors and painfully accumulated in six, seven or eight successive counts.
Even so, two of them scraped home without reaching the quota.
These lessons from Ireland can surely not be ignored by any small British party seeking fair and reliable PR.
Suppose such a party were to win, like the Progressive Democrats in 1987,11.8% of the first-preference votes.
How many additional votes it might receive by way of transfers from other parties is quite unpredictable: relatively fewer than the Progressive Democrats, one might surmise, because the distinction between political parties is sharper here than in Ireland, and voters could therefore prove more reluctant to give lower preferences to any but the party they most favour.
Even allowing it the benefit of this doubt, our hypothetical small party would be very unlikely to end up with more than the same percentage of seats, 8.4, as the Irish party.
That would mean 54 or 55 MPs out of 650, to set against a proportionate entitlement of 76  or 77.
After the British general election of 1987 the Alliance would no doubt have been gratified to find itself under-represented to a degree no greater than that.
But 55 or 56 MPs instead of 76 or 77 is not proportional representation.
In continental Europe political parties in power have been known to institute electoral systems calculated to give them unfair advantage.
It would be decidedly odd if in Britain any small party were to persist in advocating a system practically certain to work in the opposite direction.
What is here at stake, however, is not primarily the interest of any one party: it is the principle that in a democracy political minorities, save only the minimal, must be assured of the representation that is their due.
The STV was not invented to provide PR of electoral opinion in the party-political terms that are of supreme relevance today, and its performance in this regard is unacceptably flawed.
This defect, considered in conjunction with those exposed in earlier pages, ought to disqualify it as an instrument of electoral reform.
Happily a better means is available.
THE WEST GERMAN ELECTORAL SYSTEM
In the general election held in the Federal Republic of Germany in January 1987, the Christian Democratic Union won 34.5% of the national political vote and 35.0% of the seats in the Bundestag.
For the Christian Social Union the figures were 9.8% and 9.9%; for the Social Democratic Party, 37.0% and 37.4%; for the Free Democratic Party, 9.1% and 9.3%; and for the Greens, 8.3% and 8.5%.
Such impressive proportionality of representation is no accident.
It is guaranteed by West Germany's electoral system.
The Republic of Ireland took its system off the peg.
The Federal Republic carefully tailored its own.
One of the committees of the Parliamentary Council established in 1948 to draw up a new constitution was given the task of preparing a new electoral law.
It had somehow to reconcile conflicting opinions.
Supported by the British military government the CDU and the CSU, its Bavarian ally, favoured the British model: single-member constituencies with election by simple plurality.
The SPD and the FDP wanted proportional representation.
In the end a compromise was reached: there would be PR, but it would be "personalised" PR.
First used in 1949, the system was modified in the light of experience in 1953 and 1956.
Unsuccessful attempts to replace it were made in the fifties and sixties.
Subsequently it has come to be accepted without misgiving by public opinion in West Germany.
It has certainly served the nation well.
The political stability of the Republic and its economic and social achievements have by common consent been admirable.
The West German electoral system described
The West German system is at the same time a plurality or "first-past.the-post" system, a list system and an additional member system: in short a mixed system, which may be conveniently designated in the following pages by the initials WGMS.
How does it work?
Leaving out of account 22 non-voting representatives of Berlin, the Bundestag has 496 members (Mitglieder des Bundestages or MdBs).
Half of them are directly elected in 248 territorial constituencies, and the other half are additional members indirectly elected by means of party-list votes.
The sum of each party's constituency members and additional members is proportionate to its share of the party-list votes, which are consequently the votes that determine the political composition of the Bundestag.
As this summary description of the system implies, every elector has two votes.
The first is given, like the British elector's only vote, to the preferred candidate in a constituency.
The political party of all the candidates except the rare independents is indicated on the ballot paper.
In order to be elected, a constituency candidate needs only a plurality of the votes cast.
The second vote, recorded in a separate part of the ballot paper, is a vote for one political party's list of candidates.
Each list will have been drawn up not nationally, but regionally, in the voter's own land.
Candidates will have been ranked in an unalterable order of preference by the party, and the first five will be named on the ballot paper.
Independents cannot figure on any list.
A list candidate may also be a constituency candidate.
A party, can present a list without having to put up a candidate in every or indeed in any constituency.
The second vote takes effect in two stages.
First, the votes given to each of the parties in each of the Republic's ten Länder are separately aggregated to produce national totals, which are themselves then combined in a single comprehensive total.
If any party has failed to win 5.0% of this, or alternatively to win three constituency seats, it is eliminated from further consideration.
(There was in West Germany an especially cogent reason for this exclusion clause.
The PR system used in the Weimar Republic of 1919 to 1933 had made it all too easy for very small parties to be represented in the Reichstag, to the detriment of firm governance.)
Each remaining party is allotted a number of the Bundestag's 496 seats proportionate to its share of the amended overall total of votes.
Any seats that cannot be allotted in terms of the whole numbers resulting from the necessary arithmetic are distributed according to the descending sequence of decimal fractions, .9 taking precedence over .8, .8 over .7 and so on: hence a slight deviation from strict proportionality.
The exclusion of votes for very small parties is responsible for another slight deviation: it means that — as the figures given at the beginning of this chapter showed — the other patties secure a percentage of seats marginally greater than their percentage of all the votes.
These bonuses, however, are not like those capriciously awarded under the STV: they are far smaller and they are shared out proportionally.
Once the national allotment of seats has been fixed, a second stage in the assessment of the second votes gives each party its share of seats in each of the ten lander.
That share, calculated by the same arithmetic as was used to determine the national allotment, will correspond for each party to its regional proportion of its national list vote.
Thus in the 1987 election the SPD won in North Rhine-Westphalia almost exactly one third of its national vote.
So, out of its overall entitlement of 186 seats, it was awarded one third, numbering 62, in that land.
How were they to be filled?
"This is the point at which the party list comes into play.
Since in North Rhine-Westphalia the SPD won 38 constituency seats, it was entitled to 24 additional members and these were supplied by the first 24 available candidates on its list.
(The qualification "available" is necessary because some list candidates would have disappeared, having been elected in constituencies.)
Similar distribution to each party in each land results in PR that is highly accurate regionally as well as nationally.
So much so, that in some calculations to be made later in these pages it will be safe to assume very close coincidence between a party's share of the list vote in a land and its proper share of the total number of MdBs elected there: the SPD's above-mentioned 62 MdBs amounted to 43.4% of the North Rhine-Westphalia total of 143 and its list vote to 43.2%, whilst the CDU, the FOP and the Greens, with votes of 40.1%, 8.4% and 7.5% had respectively 40.6%, 8.4% and 7.7% of the MdBs.
It may be noted incidentally that if in any land the poll is higher than the national average one or more patties in it may receive a correspondingly larger allotment of seats, which, since the number of constituency seats cannot be changed, will entail a larger  allotment of list seats.
In practice variations so caused are few: in every land the total number of list seats nearly always turns out to be either the same as the total number of constituency seats or to differ from it by only one or two.
Such are the technicalities of the WGMS.
Its essential elements are the first vote given to a constituency candidate, the second vote given to a party list, and that list itself.
Each merits closer examination.
The first vote
The election of an MdB in a constituency is obviously straightforward and in numerical terms unambiguous.
Even if he has fewer votes than his competitors jointly, he is still the winner by virtue of having more votes than any one of them.
Nor is there any question of his being elected thanks to a miscellaneous accumulation of votes of lower than first preference: all the votes are clear-cut votes of first and only preference.
They are votes for a person.
To be sure, they are political votes also, as they are in Britain, and for the same reason: candidates wear political labels.
But in West Germany they are not political votes in the same overriding sense, because the outcome of constituency elections does not determine, as it does in Britain, how many seats each party will finally win.
With his first vote the West German elector can if he so desires make a choice solely with reference to the rival candidates' personal qualities or their popularity.
If the STV were to be adopted in Britain and the total number of MPs were to remain unchanged, a typical constituency could be five times the size of the average present constituency and return five MPs.
None of them would have any formal local attachment other than to the large constituency as a whole.
The WGMS would require constituencies of twice their present size.
The local MP might well not be your political favourite, any more than he is now: he would still be your MP, representing your constituency.
Election by plurality in single-member constituencies is of all methods the simplest.
Identifying indisputable winners, it suits  Proportional representation: which system? the great uncritical majority of the British electorate, inclined as it is to regard an election as some sort of sporting contest.
Unfortunately it gives rise to distortions of political representation too notorious to require here more than passing reference.
In the 1987 United Kingdom general election the Alliance with 22.6% of the national vote won 3.4% of the seats; Labour with 61.8% of the city vote won all of the eleven seats in Glasgow, and the Conservatives with 52.1% of the regional vote won all but one of the 20 seats in East Anglia.
In West Germany elections decided in constituencies alone would have similar results.
The SPD would be under-represented in rural areas, and the CDU and the CSU in the cities; the FOP and the Greens would have no seats at all in the Bundestag.
The West German second vote serves to rectify such anomalies.
The second vote
The second vote has the same unitary value for every voter: its potential does not vary with the magnitude of the constituency in which it is used.
Above all, it is a vote that is effective.
In the 1987 general election only 1.4% of the second votes did not count, having been given to minute and therefore eliminated parties.
So 98.6% — a far higher percentage than can ever be claimed for the STV — contributed to the election only MdBs.
No doubt it is because West German voters know their votes will count that they turn out so willingly to use them.
In the 1987 general elections, for which the figures are fairly typical, 73.4% of the electorate voted in Ireland, 75.3% in Britain and 84.4% in West Germany.
The effectiveness of the second vote depends of course on its being assessed on a national basis, not in separate constituencies.
The FOP regularly puts up constituency candidates, but it has not won a constituency seat since 1957.
In subsequent elections its percentage of second votes, once as low as 5.8 and never higher than 12.8, has ensured its continuous representation in the Bundestag.
The Greens, whose first MdBs were elected in 1983, also field constituency candidates, but they have yet to win a constituency seat.
In 1987 they attracted 8.7% of the party-list  votes.
The 3.1 million electors who gave those votes were entitled to expect representation, and they got it, in the form of 42 MdBs.
Small parties in Britain should be particularly interested to observe how the Alliance might have fared under the WGMS in the last two general elections.
If its percentage of second votes had been the same as the overall percentage of the constituency votes it then received, it would in 1983 have been guaranteed 165 seats instead of the 23 it actually won, and 147 instead of 22 in 1987.
It might have done considerably better than that.
Many electors undoubtedly withheld votes from some of its constituency candidates because they judged them sure to be defeated.
To Alliance lists they could have given votes in the knowledge that these would not be wasted.
The essential point, however, is not what advantage any one party might derive from the WGMS: it is the assurance that unless you choose to give it to some tiny party your second vote will count.
Split voting in West Germany
As we saw earlier, the claim that the STV can be a "vote for a coalition" must be rejected: if you have only one vote it can benefit only one party.
With two votes West Germans are in a different position, even though their first vote may not be of any use.
Most of them as might be expected give their two votes to the same party,.
A substantial minority, however, do not.
Thus in 1987 the SPD received in round figures 14.75 million constituency votes, but 14.0 m. list votes, so that 0.75 m. went elsewhere.
The CDU had 14.0 m. first votes and 13.0 m. second votes, so that 1.0 m. went elsewhere.
The major beneficiary was the FOP: its 3.5 m. second votes amounted to twice as many as its 1.75 m. first votes.
This was no new phenomenon.
If in one election alter another considerable numbers of electors supporting the CDU/CSU or the SPD with their first votes had not switched their second votes to the FOP its representation in the Bundestag could have been reduced to insignificance or vanished altogether.
The history of the Federal Republic might then have followed a more erratic course.
On the right of the political spectrum are the CDU and the CSU, in effect  a single party; on the left, the SPD; the FDP is in the middle.
From 1957 to 1961 the CDU/CSU governed alone, and from 1966 to 1969 in a "Grand Coalition" with the SPD.
At no other time has either left or right been able to form a government without the support of the FOP, which has therefore been the essential junior partner in coalition either with the CDU/CSU or, less often, with the SPD.
Believers in "conviction politics" will judge that the influence thus exercised by a relatively small party has been excessive.
True democrats will easily be persuaded that in the absence of an absolute majority for either of the two big parties the pivotal role of a third party is inevitable and salutary.
If the big parties do not like it the remedy is in their own hands: all they have to do is to steal that third party's votes.
In recent years the Greens have begun to profit like the FOP from split voting.
In 1983 they had 1.6 m. first votes, 2.1 m. second votes; in 1987 2.6 m. first, 3.1 m. second.
Their name suffices to show that unlike the FOP they have no ambition to occupy the middle ground, and their precise situation in West German politics remains uncertain.
That such a young party should now have 42 MdBs is all the more striking.
Why should split voting be so common in West Germany?
The great majority of voters give their first vote either to the CDU/CSU or to the SPD in much the same way as most British voters give their only vote to the Conservatives or Labour: that is where their basic loyalty lies.
At the same time many among them are sympathetic to the Greens, whom their second vote gives them the opportunity to support.
If there are also many who give that vote to the FOP, it is because they back "their own" party with reservations.
Whilst wanting it to do well, they mistrust single-party government, and they want the FOP to continue to serve in the Bundestag as a restraint on possible extremism.
Although the chance to split votes is from the British standpoint a novelty which a commentator cannot ignore, it should not be regarded as more than a minor feature of the WGMS.
What is crucial is simply the existence of the second vote, which secures fair representation for all but the very smallest of parties.
Party lists
And what about those party lists?
Although they are a standard device in parliamentary elections in most of the democracies of continental Europe, they are an abomination for the evangelists of the STV and sometimes a stumbling block for less prejudiced supporters of electoral reform.
When it does not spring from mere distaste for all that is foreign, hostility to party lists is commonly associated with obsessive and fatalistic mistrust of political parties themselves.
These abstract entities, it is plaintively alleged, wield excessive and irresponsible power.
The party organization, the party, machine, the party bureaucracy — these are expressions too convenient to be entirely dispensed with, and they are not always used inaccurately.
They can, however, distract attention from the truism that parties are composed of people and are responsible to them, their members.
Critics of the power exercised by parties may perhaps be reminded that they are at liberty to join the party, of their choice, to be active in it and to use there such influence as they can acquire.
Content to remain spectators, they cannot reasonably complain about the way the political game is played by those willing to suffer its tedium and its tensions.
One objection made against West German party, lists is that MdBs chosen from them are not directly answerable to the electorate.
How much does that matter?
Being "directly answerable to the electorate" really means no more than that if your MP presents himself for reelection you can vote either for him or against.
In Ireland the personal accountability of a, TD has as we have seen unfortunate consequences: it puts a premium on mere popularity and enfeebles the Dail.
In Britain it is doubtful whether the personal accountability of an MP seeking reelection has anything like the importance attached to it by some theorists.
What really matters is political accountability, enabling the electorate to pass judgement on the performance of parties whether in government or in opposition.
The WGMS allows that judgement to be accurately recorded.
Dislike of party lists is often fortified by dark suspicions about the quality of the candidates they supposedly include.
These, it is argued, will be mediocrities, no more than "good party men" , "loyal apparatchiks" .
(as if such undesirables were not precisely the sort of candidates all too often put up by parties and elected by voters in both British and Irish constituencies!)
The West German electorate appears not to share these misgivings.
As might be supposed, West German parties do indeed use their regional lists to promote the election of their most favoured candidates.
High priority is given to any of their senior members who have held ministerial office.
Some priority is usually given to MdBs seeking reelection.
Nearly all constituency candidates figure on party lists, so that if rejected locally they may still become MdBs.
This possibility will seem unacceptable only to critics who insist that election must be by votes cast directly and personally for the successful candidate.
West German electors recognize the propriety of indirect election justified by votes given to parties, and might well be surprised that political figures as eminent as Shirley Williams, Roy Jenkins and Enoch Powell could be excluded from the House of Commons simply by the say-so of voters in Cambridge, Glasgow Hillhead and Down South.
That list candidates will be staunch party members goes without saying.
The rebel will have to try to win a constituency seat.
But loyalty need not imply unquestioning conformity, and the West German parties comprehend as many varieties of political stance as do the British.
In drawing up their lists they take great care to achieve a balance that reflects the diversity of the electorate's concerns.
So places are found for representatives of different professions, occupations, generations, communities and churches as well as other interest groups from which electoral support may be expected.
Since West German parties and voters have deep respect for professional competence, lists may include also experts not distinguished for party, activity or well suited to constituency campaigning.
No party will discredit itself by selecting list candidates who are no more than puppets.
MdBs generally stand high in public esteem — higher than our own MPs — and half of them will have entered the Bundestag by way of party lists.
Lists are what parties choose to make of them.
Though in West Germany they do not present the politically balanced slate so  dear to advocates of the STV, they could easily be used to that end.
Moreover lists tend to facilitate the election of women.
In 198741 women entered the House of Commons, more than ever before, but still only 6.3% of all MPs.
In 1989 13 women entered the bail, 7.8% of all TDs.
The corresponding percentage in countries that rely wholly on list systems is commonly much higher — regularly well over 20, for example, in Norway, Sweden, Denmark and Finland.
In West Germany women elected from party lists have consistently outnumbered those elected in constituencies by more than three to one.
Even so, in the first eight of the Republic's general elections they enjoyed nothing like the success of women candidates in Scandinavia.
Recently they have fared better.
In 1987 23.4% of the list MdBs were women, and 15.4% of all MdBs; both figures set new records.
The Greens contributed to them significantly.
Of their 42 MdBs — all of them as we noted earlier elected from lists — no less than 24 were women, because women had been given on average higher list rankings than men.
If the WGMS were adopted in Britain a party that followed this example could well reap a bumper harvest of list votes.
But though none might be prepared to go so far as that, all British parties would quickly realize that apparent discrimination against women in their lists would do them a lot of harm.
We should soon have more women MPs.
Likewise, we should soon have more MPs representing ethnic minorities wherever these formed a substantial part of the electorate.
Two kinds of MdBs?
In the British mind the distinction between constituency MdBs and list MdBs will seem sharp: must they not divide into two classes, first and second?
The West German answer is emphatically "No" .
The two kinds of MdBs enjoy equal respect among the electorate and in their party.
They have equal standing in the Bundestag, where they have the same chances of being appointed to committees and promoted to ministerial rank.
However, neither constituency MdBs nor list MdBs have quite the same conception of their responsibilities as do British MPs.
Naturally constituency MdBs are expected like MPs to take a lively interest in issues of particular local concern.
List MdBs must emulate them if they wish to safeguard their place on their party's list or hope to win a constituency seat at the next election.
In West Germany there is not the same sensitivity as in Britain about encroachment on supposed territorial rights.
It is accepted that a list MdB who has been defeated in a constituency may make his services available there, and he is as likely as the constituency's own MdB to receive requests for assistance.
But West Germany is a federal state in which each of the constituent Länder has a government of its own.
When a British citizen might seek redress for a grievance through his MP, the West German is likely to turn to his representative in the regional assembly or Landtag.
Consequently an MdB is much less harassed by routine constituency casework than is a conscientious MP.
He is free to consider himself first and foremost a participant in the nationally important business of the Bundestag.
Voters' choice on party lists?
Two questions about the WGMS remain.
First, is it inevitable that political parties, not voters, should rank candidates on their lists, and thus decide which of them will have the best chances of being elected?
The answer must be prefaced by a reminder that the WGMS relies only partially on the use of party lists: it provides for the direct election in constituencies of half the MdBs.
No such provision is made in the other European democracies in which lists are used.
There they form the sole basis of the electoral system, and it is therefore indispensable that voters should be allowed to choose between the candidates they include.
If the WGMS were to be adopted in Britain, could no way be found of modifying it so as to afford the same opportunity?
Anyone who supposed that would be a simple matter should examine the actual operation of list systems in continental Europe.
In all probability he would be bewildered.
Among the various choices available to electors in different  countries are the following: they may vote for one candidate, or a specified number of candidates, or for as many candidates as there are members to be elected; they may cumulate two votes on one candidate; they may cast votes on more than one list; presented with lists on which the parties have arranged the candidates in an order of preference they can change that order.
Once the votes have been recorded, the problem remains of translating them into seats.
Some of the solutions adopted are of an intricacy that to a British observer seems almost unbelievable.
The simplest way of dealing with the whole business is suggested by the main features of electoral practice in Finland.
There the voter chooses just one candidate on a list; the total number of votes received by a party's candidates determines its proportionate entitlement of seats; and the candidates elected to fill them are those who have the most votes.
This procedure, however, reproduces the basic absurdity of the STV, under which you have only one vote however many members are to be elected in your constituency.
It entails moreover the risk that if the list is long voting will tend to be little more than a popularity poll, with most votes heavily concentrated on the best-known candidates, leaving the election of others to be decided by relatively few votes, cast by electors probably unrepresentative of the electorate as a whole.
Whatever choices are offered to voters and however they are assessed they must be informed choices.
Voters will need to know enough about the candidates to be able to judge their relative merits.
The larger the electorate and the greater the number of candidates on a list, the less likely voters are to have this knowledge, and the converse is obviously true.
So two pertinent questions are how many electors, and how many names on a party list.
These numbers will clearly be related to the magnitude of the super-constituency".
I use this term to denote the area within which party, lists are drawn up and candidates elected from them.
In West Germany the super-constituencies are the ten Länder.
In Lower Saxony the magnitude of the electorate is a little below the national average.
of the 4,748,145 list votes cast there in the 1987 general election 2,015,731 went to the CDU list, which comprised some 60 names.
Three of the Länder have a larger electorate than Lower Saxony — in North Rhine-Westphalia it is more than twice as large — and consequently more MdBs and longer party lists.
Given the opportunity, could so many electors have chosen intelligently between so many candidates?
The answer can scarcely be in doubt.
In no country in which preferences among list candidates can be expressed are the relevant numbers anything like so great as in most of the West German Länder.
Smaller super-constituencies, then, would seem to be necessary.
But the smaller they are, the greater the probability within them of the sort of unacceptably crude proportionality that is furnished by the STV in Ireland and of consequent unfairness to all but the bigger parties.
In order to guarantee fair representation for a party securing 5.0% of the list votes, a super-constituency must return twenty members, of whom ten would normally be elected from lists.
Suppose now that one were to envisage the introduction of twenty-member super-constituencies in the United Kingdom.
Their average electorate, calculated on the 1987 figures, would be about 1.3 m.
It would in some parts of the country be distributed over a wide area: the whole of East Anglia, for instance, with at present precisely 20 single-member constituencies, and in Scotland some considerably more extensive territories.
Suppose that on average 80% of the 1.3 m. electors took the trouble to vote — say 1.0 m.
Of these 0.5 m. might well vote for one party.
Would those 0.5 m. voters be able to cope sensibly with a list which if West German custom were followed would include twenty names?— or for that matter with a list of 15 names or ten?
It is by no means certain.
In any case it would first of all be necessary to demarcate the requisite number of super-constituencies.
If the United Kingdom were geographically more compact, or if it had a much smaller electorate and far fewer MPs to be elected, that might not prove very difficult.
In reality it would be an administrative nightmare.
The Länder of West Germany are not simply electoral super.
constituencies.
Each has its own genuine identity, has its own government and exists in its own right.
Here, more than 30 twenty.
member super-constituencies would be needed for the election of  650 MPs.
Few of them could be other than mere contrivances, devoid of any obvious unity and as arbitrary and controversial as those miscalled "natural communities" that have been proposed for the operation of the STV.
Moreover the political parties would have to set up in every one of them the organization required for the preparation of their lists: an obligation they would be very unlikely to contemplate with enthusiasm.
Need it be emphasized that this exposition claims to be no more than schematic?
It points all the same to a conclusion that is plain enough.
Even if— and it is a big "if" — an unobjectionable means could be devised by which choice among candidates on party lists could be indicated and also convincingly assessed for the award of seats, the possibility of that choice could not be provided by any practicable modification of the WGMS which would at the same time ensure a high degree of proportionality and be acceptable to British electors and parties.
A British voter aggrieved by being denied choice among candidates on party lists should ask himself just how much choice among candidates of the same party he is allowed under our present system and how much he would be allowed under the STV.
In Britain he has no choice: he must vote for the single constituency candidate that his party has selected.
In Ireland he might be able to choose between several candidates, but they would all have been selected by his party, and in such a way as to condition his choice if not to determine it absolutely.
The predominant influence of parties in deciding which of their candidates shall win seats is an inescapable fact of political life, however much some of us may deplore it.
Candidates are ranked in an order of preference in Britain and in Ireland as well as in West Germany's party lists — less rigorously, it is true, but hardly less effectively.
In Britain a party's first-category candidates somehow find themselves adopted for seats they are all but certain to win, second-category candidates for marginals and third-category candidates for seats they have no hope of winning.
In Ireland a party that puts up several candidates in a constituency will easily predict which of them are going to be elected, which may and which won't.
All calculations of this kind may of course be upset, but almost invariably because of a swing in  the electorate's judgment not of candidates but of their politics.
The strategy of the parties will in any event remain clear.
Its object, usually achieved, will be to ensure that its best candidates (however defined) are elected.
In Britain and Ireland this is managed informally, even surreptitiously; in West German party lists, systematically and openly.
The WGMS — the point will bear iteration — firmly grasps the principle that representation is concerned more with parties than with persons.
Proportional or not, it is basically a numbers game.
(How much would this country and the world have heard even of the Right Honourable Member for Finchley if she had not been backed in the House by that numerical Conservative superiority?)
Under the WGMS the power of voters may appear to be restricted.
It is in fact increased, inasmuch as their political choices are assured of fair parliamentary representation.
The viability of the WGMS
The second question about the WGMS that must be addressed is whether it is technically sound.
It works well in West Germany.
Could it be relied on to work well in the United Kingdom?
It could indeed.
However, factors that might theoretically if not actually subject it to some strain need to be understood, as do those conducive to its most efficient operation.
No system which like the WGMS purports to secure PR by recourse to the election of additional members should have its viability taken for granted.
A distinguished Commission on Electoral Reform set up under the auspices of the Hansard Society published in 1976 a Report in which it included its own proposals for a new electoral system.
There should be electoral regions, in which three quarters of the seats should be filled as at present by constituency members and one quarter by additional members.
Each party's entitlement of seats should be proportionate to its share of the total constituency votes received by candidates of all parties, and it would be met by the award (if necessary) of a number of additional seats so calculated as to "redress the distorted results in  the constituencies" .
In the Report a pretty little example is given of the system's performance in a mini-region having just 12 seats.
Party A, imagined to have won 45.4% of the constituency votes, has a claim to six seats (50.0%), and having won five in constituencies is given one additional seat.
Corresponding figures are for Party B 28.6% of the votes, four seats (33.3%), of which three are won in constituencies and one is additional; for Party C 13.6% of the votes, one seat (8.3%) won in a constituency and no more; and for Party D 12.3% of the votes and one seat (8.3%), which is an additional seat.
It all works out very neatly, and an "acceptable degree of proportionality" is secured with no trouble.
Fiction, however, is one thing and reality is another.
Studying the results of the general election of 1974, the latest held before the publication of its Report, the Commission could have come across some disconcerting figures.
For instance, in the South-East region (as defined in the relevant edition of the Times Guide to the House of Commons) the Liberals won none of the 40 seats, Labour took only three, whilst the Conservatives — for less than half the total constituency votes — bagged all the rest.
Under the Commission's system the region would have had 30 constituency seats of which, given similar hypothetical patterns of voting, the Liberals, Labour and the Conservatives might have been expected to win none, two and 28 respectively.
The parties' shares of the total constituency votes would have been, let us suppose, the same as they were in fact: 48.4% for the Conservatives, 27.2% for Labour and 23.9% for the Liberals.
Their overall entitlement would then have been 19 seats, 11 and 10.
But thanks to their 28 victories in the constituencies the Conservatives would have had nine seats (28 minus 19) too many, whilst from the pool of ten additional seats it would have been impossible to furnish both the nine additional seats due to Labour (11 minus two won in constituencies) and the ten additional seats owing to the Liberals.
Truly a chaotic outcome!
Usually the imbalance of representation that the Commission's system was intended to redress is less striking.
Even so, in 1974 and in subsequent general elections the system would have proved viable only in a minority of regions.
Astonishingly the Commission failed to realize that its proposed  ratio of one additional member for three constituency members would be inadequate.
The WGMS, having a ratio of one additional (i.e. list) member for every constituency member is far more realistic.
Applied in the South-East region in 1974 it would have encountered no difficulty.
The probable result, producing very good PR, would have been ten list seats for the Liberals, two constituency seats plus nine list seats for Labour, and 18 constituency seats plus one list seat for the Conservatives.
The assumptions on which this conclusion is based will be made clear in a later paragraph.
Suffice it to observe meanwhile that no great arithmetical nous is required to work out a formula indicating the limit of the WGMS's capacity to rectify anomalies.
Let x be the percentage of a region's constituency seats won by any one party.
Let y be the percentage of list votes given to that party, i.e. the votes that will entitle it to an identical percentage of all the seats, constituency and list, in the region.
The desired formula (strictly valid only if constituency seats and list seats are equal in number) will then show that the system will function tidily so long as there is no party for which x exceeds 2y.
However, if there is such a pasty, it will have one or more seats in excess of its proper entitlement.
Excess seats constitute the only technical snag in the WGMS.
In 1987 the CDU had one such seat in Baden-Württemberg, where it won 36(97.3%) of the 37 constituencies.
Its percentage of the list votes was 46.7, so that out of the region's total of 74 seats it was entitled to 35.
With 36 in the constituencies it had one too many: at 97.3% was more than twice as large as y at 46.7%.
But excess seats are rare.
In the eleven general elections held in the Federal Republic they have successively numbered 2, 3, 3, 5, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 2 and 1 — only 17 in all.
Parties must obviously be allowed to retain excess seats, so the membership of the Bundestag has to be increased.
Thus when the CDU won its excess seat in 1987 its total representation, which should have been 173, went up to 174 out of 496 plus one MdBs.
Proportionality was impaired, but almost imperceptibly.
Several factors, sometimes working concurrently, may be responsible for the winning of excess seats.
Among them is the failure of second-vote support for a party to match up to its first-vote  support.
This is well illustrated in the above-mentioned award of an excess seat to the CDU in 1987.
At 46.7 its regional list vote percentage was 4.8 points lower than its constituency vote percentage at 51.5.
Without this disparity it would have had an overall entitlement of 38 seats, and instead of winning one excess seat it would have had two list seats in addition to the 36 it won in constituencies.
A second factor is the existence in a region of a disproportionately large number of constituencies, enabling a party (especially the strongest) to win more seats than it would normally.
By 1961 depopulation had reduced the average size of constituency electorates in Schleswig-Holstein to 11 6,153, well below the national average of 151,582.
In other words that and had been allowed to retain too many constituencies: 14, instead of the 11 it should have had.
Markedly out of balance with the ten list seats fairly allotted to Schleswig-Holstein, these 14 gave the CDU the opportunity to win no less than 13 seats.
As determined by its share of the list vote, its overall entitlement was nine.
Of the 13 seats, four — a record number — were therefore excess seats.
With effect from the general election of 1965 West German electoral law was amended so as to impose stricter limits on variations in constituency magnitudes.
This resulted in the loss of three of Schleswig-Holstein's 14 constituencies, and goes far to explain why in the whole of the Federal Republic there were only four excess seats in seven general elections held from 1965 onwards compared with 13 in the previous four.
One further possible cause of excess seats, and perhaps the most obvious, is the winning by a fortunate party of a very large share of a region's constituency seats by majorities that are on average far short of being absolute and will be reflected in the modest size of its decisive list vote.
This happened in Schleswig-Holstein in 1961, contributing to the acquisition of those four excess seats by the CDU.
Not only did it win 13 of the 14 constituency seats (92.9%): it managed to do so on an average constituency vote of no more than 43.5%, which was further reduced by the usual leakage to a list vote of 41.8%.
As we have seen, constituency seats and list seats were not equal in number, nor in 1961 was the  allotment of seats to parties calculated in exactly the same way as it is now.
For these reasons our test formula — x must not be greater than 2y — is here not wholly reliable.
All the same it can strongly suggest that with, at 92.9 and y at 41.8 the CDU was sure to win excess seats.
If the WGMS had been used in Britain in 1987 it would have been put to an exacting test in the South-East (regarded in this context as one of the nine officially defined standard regions of England).
There the Conservatives won 99.1% of the seats — 107 out of 108 — for 55.6% of the constituency votes.
In order to judge the WGMS's hypothetical performance three assumptions have to be made.
First, the number of constituency and of list seats would be equal: 54 of each kind if the total of the region's MPs was to remain unchanged.
Second, the pattern of voting would be the same in the 54 new constituencies as in the actual 108, in which case 53 of them would be won by the Conservatives.
Third, they would have the same percentage — 55.6 — of the list votes as they did of the actual constituency votes.
They would then have no excess seat.
Entitled to 60 seats in all, and having secured 53 in the constituencies, they would be awarded seven of the list seats, the remaining 47 being available for proportionate distribution among the other parties.
If the Conservatives' list vote were no more than 50%, the system would still work smoothly: they would have in addition to their 53 constituency seats just one list seat, giving them their due total of 54.
Scotland considered as an electoral region would be an interesting proving-ground for the WGMS.
Like Schleswig-Holstein before 1965 it has too many constituencies, with electorates of less than average magnitude.
Like the CDU in Schleswig-Holstein in 1961, Labour in Scotland has long been able to win a majority of the seats — not so overwhelming as the CDU's but still substantial — with an unimpressive average constituency vote: in 1987, for example, the latter at only 42.4% sufficed to elect 50, i.e. 69.4%, of Scotland's 72 MPs.
The WGMS could correct this distortion comfortably.
Scotland would have, proportionately to the rest of the United Kingdom and on the basis of the relevant 1987 figures, 30 constituency and 30 list MPs.
On assumptions similar to those made  in the preceding paragraph Labour would win 21 of the 30 constituency seats, would have a claim to 25 seats altogether, and would therefore be awarded four list seats.
Only if its list vote fell to 33.3%, incredibly 9.1 points below its constituency vote, and its overall entitlement were thus reduced to 20 seats, would Labour have just one excess seat.
Certainly patterns of voting can be imagined that would stretch the WGMS beyond the limit of its perfect efficiency.
In 1974 the SNP, Conservative and Labour candidates in Dunbartonshire East had respectively 15,551, 15,529 and 15,122 votes.
(The Liberal had only 3,626.)
That victory cost the SNP no more than 31.2% of the poll.
What if under the WGMS a party were to win, on some similarly exiguous vote, not just one constituency seat in a region, but many?
Might these include an unacceptably large number of excess seats?
That is indeed theoretically possible.
However, our test formula shows that, given an equal number of constituency and of list seats, a party with an average of only 31.2% of the constituency vote and the same percentage of the list vote (y) would not have even one excess seat unless it won more than 62.4% (x) of the constituency seats.
If y stood at 40%, x would have to be greater than 80% for any excess seat to be won.
Exhaustive assessment of the probable incidence of such eventualities lies outside the scope of these pages.
Undertaken — if it were thought necessary — by expert psephological statisticians, it would doubtless confirm their extreme unlikelihood.
The WGMS could, in short, be adopted in the United Kingdom in full confidence that insignificant hiccups in the form of excess seats would be no more frequent than they are in the Federal Republic, where it has been tested in eleven general elections and not found wanting.
A REFORMED ELECTORAL SYSTEM
To Dr David Butler, the doyen of electoral studies in Britain, it "seems unlikely that first-past-the-post voting for the Westminster Parliament will last to the end of the century" ."
Amen to that!
But how will first-past-the-post voting come to be superseded, Not, we may regrettably foresee, because one at least of the two big parties has belatedly recognized that PR is a fundamental principle of true democracy.
Electoral reform can, it seems, be realistically expected only when it is initiated by a minority Conservative or Labour government as the price of survival exacted by a party or combination of parties holding the balance of power.
Will discussion of reform then be remitted, as it has been on several occasions from 1916 onwards, to a Speaker's Conference?
Will a new electoral system eventually be put to the test of a referendum?
Speculation is vain.
The only certainty is that if rationality were to prevail — as it sometimes does — the outcome would be the adoption of a scheme modelled on the WGMS: simply, the Reformed Electoral System, the RES for short.
What practical arrangements would that entail?
Regions and constituencies
Electoral regions would have to be defined.
Three of them would obviously be Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
No less obviously the others could conveniently be, with a little modification, the nine standard regions of England.
Although their boundaries cannot be other than arbitrary, the South-West, the West Midlands, the Northern and the rest are for the most part easily identifiable territories, demarcated with a fair degree of consistency by public authorities, the media and national associations of all sorts including political parties.
As at present constituted the magnitude of the South-East region, with 8.0 m. electors in 1987, would be disproportionately large and that of East Anglia with just under 1.5 m. disproportionately small.
A sensible adjustment has been  suggested (in the context of the election of MEPs) by M.Steed of the University of Manchester: let Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire and Essex be taken away from the South-East region and combined with East Anglia to form a new Eastern region.
New constituencies would have to be devised, 325 in number if there were still to be 650 MPs.
They would on average cover twice the area of present constituencies, and their electorates, at about 130,000 on the 1987 figures, would be twice as large.
They could clearly be smaller if the number of MPs were to be increased, although West Germany manages very well with electorates averaging in 1987 some 183,000.
Under the RES the number of constituencies allotted to each region would need to be proportionately related to its percentage of the national electorate.
Thus Scotland and Wales would no longer have more than their fair share, and the average magnitude of their constituencies would be virtually the same as in the English regions.
Shockingly anomalous magnitudes should no longer be tolerated.
No constituency should be allowed to have an extraordinarily small electorate on the pretext that it comprises widely dispersed and isolated communities.
Electors in the Western Isles — 23,607 in 1987 — are the beneficiaries or the victims of the same legislation and policies as the rest of us, including electors in the Isle of Wight — 98,694 in 1987 — and can have no right to elect an MP on favourable and grossly unfair terms.
West German electoral law prescribes that in principle the magnitude of a constituency should not deviate by more than 25% from the average, and that if it deviates by more than 33.3% its boundaries must be redrawn.
British electoral law should include the same provision.
Still using the 1987 figures, the following table shows how 325 constituencies of very nearly equal average magnitude could be distributed in the twelve proposed regions of the United Kingdom.
Just one of the regions, Northern Ireland, with eight constituency members and an assumed equal number of list members, would have fewer than the minimum total of 20 required to ensure fair representation therein for a party securing 5% of the list votes.
That is true also of the three smallest of the West German Länder, but without significant detriment to the equitable operation of the system as a whole.
The shortfall in Northern Ireland of no more than four members could hardly give rise to serious objection.
The conclusion clause in the RES
It will be recalled that in the first stage of the distribution of seats in the WGMS any pasty failing to win either 5% of the list votes or three constituency seats is excluded.
In the 1987 West German election eleven tiny parties put up candidates.
They took no constituency seat and had only 1.4% of the list votes.
However, if they had been granted representation proportionate to their minute share of those votes, four or five of their candidates could have become MdBs: the exclusion clause served to prevent that.
In the 1987 United Kingdom general election only a handful of very small parties that were genuinely political fielded candidates.
In constituencies they fared as badly as their West German counterparts, and nationally even worse, winning overall only 0.4% of the votes.
One might suppose, then, that under the RES an exclusion clause would be superfluous, since the few parties affected by it would be debarred from representation by the very paucity of their support.
That would be a mistake.
Assuming the same number of MPs as in 1987 and the same total number of votes, here taken to be list votes, a pasty would need only 50,000, or 0.15%, in order to have an arithmetically proportionate claim to one seat, a claim it would be unreasonable to honour.
Having regard to future possibilities as well as present realities, an exclusion clause would be indispensable in the new system.
Whether the WGMS formula of three constituency seats or 5% of the list votes is exactly right or whether other figures would  be more appropriate is of course debatable.
In West Germany itself the 5% hurdle has sometimes been judged too high.
In Israel, where there are no constituencies and elections are determined entirely by votes on national party lists, the crucial figure, 1.0%, seems too low.
In 1988 it allowed thirteen very small parties to secure 41 of the Knesset's 120 seats.
With a 5% exclusion clause only one of these parties would have been granted representation, and the complex process of forming a government would have been much less painful.
Whatever its precise terms an exclusion clause designed to operate on a national basis cannot be justly applied to a party active in only one part of the country and putting up no candidates elsewhere.
Special dispensations would have to be made in the RES in fairness to the nationalist parties of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
All that would be necessary is that England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland should be treated as distinct electoral entities.
In each, list votes would be separately counted and seats separately allotted to parties.
The percentage condition of the exclusion clause would apply not to list votes cast in the whole of the United Kingdom, but to list votes cast in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland as the case might be.
The alternative condition of the exclusion clause could, following the German example, require three constituency seats to be won in England, but elsewhere perhaps no more than one.
A minor simplification of the RES would result from these arrangements.
Only in England would there need to be, as in West Germany, first a national distribution of seats to parties, then a regional distribution.
In Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, per se entire electoral regions, no more than a single distribution would be required.
The selection of candidates
Under any electoral system nomination as a candidate can often be tantamount to a guarantee of eventual election.
So it is under our present system, and so it would be under the RES, if it were nomination either for a safe constituency seat or for a high  position on a party list.
All the more reason, then, why nominations should reflect the opinion of the majority of the party members on whose behalf they are made.
To suppose that the influence of a minority of party activists will not in the end prevail is to delude oneself.
It can, however, at least be subjected to some measure of democratic control, as it is in West Germany.
There, electoral law requires that a constituency candidate shall be chosen by secret ballot either in a meeting of party members specially convened for that purpose, or by an ad hoc committee itself elected by secret ballot; and party officers must give the returning officer a solemn assurance that these procedures have been observed.
In the United Kingdom legal requirements should be similar, though not necessarily identical.
Surprisingly the WGMS makes no provision in the present context for postal ballots, which are arguably preferable to voting that requires attendance at the relevant meeting.
In West Germany the requirements for the selection of constituency candidates apply also, mutatis mutandis, to the selection of list candidates, with the important additional stipulation that the ranking of these must like their nomination be decided by secret ballot: again, an example that United Kingdom electoral law should follow.
It would clearly be impracticable for all of a party's members to  foregather from every corner of a region to select and rank its list candidates, so it is sometimes suggested that American style primaries should be held for this purpose.
Yet United States experience is scarcely encouraging, for primaries held there typically attract a turn-out of no more than 30%.
Besides, primaries used for the selection and ranking of persons proposed for inclusion in party lists would be open to much the same objections as were raised earlier in these pages against choice by the electorate at large among candidates who actually figure in those lists.
Party members might be supposed capable of choosing more knowledgeably than the generality of less committed voters.
Considering how widely they would be dispersed throughout an extensive electoral region, would they all the same be knowledgeable enough to express judicious preferences among the numerous names put forward?
Would not their votes tend to cumulate not so much on the best candidates as on the best-known?
In any case primaries could well give rise to  organized campaigning, too expensive to be envisaged by all but the well-heeled.
If primaries are ruled out, lists must be drawn up by delegates of the parties, best chosen by a postal ballot and assembled as is the usual West German practice in a nominating convention.
Only thus can the selection and ranking of candidates be rationally managed, the nomination of the second candidate being approved in full awareness of the selection of the first, the nomination of the third being approved after the selection of the first two, and so on.
A list thus compiled will derive from choices more intelligently made and more efficiently expressed than any that could emerge from a primary; and if in recording regional judgements it should not be entirely pleasing to a party's national headquarters, so much, most provincials would say, the better.
The ballot paper
In 1986 a New Zealand Royal Commission on the Electoral System recommended the adoption subject to approval in a referendum (not yet held) of what was basically the WGMS.
In so doing it suggested a small but distinct improvement on that model: the party-list vote should be the first on the ballot paper, not the second as it is in West Germany, and the constituency vote should come second instead of first.
This modification should be incorporated in the British RES.
It would help to emphasize that, contrary to what some West German voters imagine, the pasty-list vote carries greater weight than the constituency vote.
Lightening the burden of casework
Concurrently with the introduction of the RES steps should be taken to make it easier for MPs to cope with their often oppressive burden of constituency casework.
Their prime responsibility is to attend to the political affairs of the nation: rightly understood, a task so important and exacting that they should be  distracted from it as little as possible by the relatively trivial business generated in their surgeries.
None of the allowances they now receive is specifically related to this time-consuming work.
For any expense that would help them to get through it with a minimum of inconvenience and effort, they should be able to claim, subject to appropriate limits and verification, reimbursement from public funds.
Grants should be available to all MPs — including under the RES list MPs — for the provision and the staffing of a local office.
In constituencies covering wide areas and those in which socioeconomic deprivation could be held to create exceptional need for the intervention of an MP, more than one office, permanent or mobile, could be justified.
Staffing could legitimately include personal assistants competent to undertake not just secretarial duties but also the preliminary screening of constituents' problems, any necessary investigative donkey-work and the drafting of correspondence.
These are the sort of facilities already enjoyed by MPs who can somehow or other find the money to pay for them: they should be fully at the disposal of those who can't.
Towards a new style of politics
What, finally, about the effects of the RES?
They would be far-reaching.
The new system would do more than ensure fair parliamentary representation of the electorate's political choices: it would change the character of our governments.
It would not call into question — indeed it would confirm — the right to govern of any one party which could claim a mandate authenticated by an absolute majority of the popular vote.
The RES would, however, make it unlikely that such a mandate would be granted.
It would be almost certain to give the strongest party not a majority of seats, but only a plurality, thus rendering it incapable of governing without the support or at least the consent of one other party.
That prospect, far from being feared, should be welcomed.
Their own experience tends to make most of today's British voters assume that government means government by a single party.
But in our century there have been British coalition governments in  1915, 1922 and 1940–1945, and governments that existed by tacit agreement between parties in 1910–1915 and 1977–1979.
None of these governments had a bad record, and the coalition of 1940–1945 had an outstandingly good one.
In the democracies of continental Europe coalition governments are the rule rather than the exception.
Their performance is not inferior to that of single-party British governments and has often, notably in France after de Gaulle and in West Germany, been conspicuously better.
Single-party governments can easily become doctrinaire, dictatorial and divisive, as recent British experience has amply and unhappily shown.
They tend to identify the common good with the interests, real or imagined, of their supporters.
They exacerbate political confrontation, in which disagreements, often factitious, are exaggerated by the arrogant and absurd presumption that since "we" are always right "they" must always be wrong.
Coalition governments imply, as civilized behaviour usually does, readiness to compromise rather than engage in conflict that can end only with winners and losers.
British single-parry governments are properly speaking minority governments.
Sanctioned by an electoral majority, coalition governments are likely to prove more lastingly effective.
The legislation they enact must be acceptable to a wider range of public opinion and will therefore be less subject to reversal by any subsequent government.
Besides fair representation another inestimable benefit could be expected from the RES: it would encourage movement away from the adversarial style of politics and towards the consensual, more appropriate to the government of the people for all the people.