

Approaches and methods
Style and choice
The task of this chapter is to investigate the phenomenon of style in general terms, and so to prepare the ground for the analysis of its various aspects and manifestations in later chapters.
We must take account of the various ways in which the word "style" has been used in the past: but we should be wary of becoming slaves to verbal definition.
Definitions are useful only in so far as they encapsulate a particular conception or theory of the phenomena one wishes to study.
They can broaden or narrow, illuminate or inhibit the understanding of verbal artistry.
So we shall aim to work through definitions towards a richer appreciation of what literary style is and how it can best be analysed.
1.1 THE DOMAIN OF STYLE
In its most general interpretation, the word STYLE has a fairly uncontroversial meaning: it refers to the way in which language is used in a given context, by a given person, for a given purpose, and so on.
To clarify this, we may adopt the Swiss linguist Saussure's distinction between langue and parole ,langue being the code or system of rules common to speakers of a language (such as English), and parole being the particular uses of this system, or selections from this system, that speakers or writers make on this or that occasion.
One may say, for example, that certain English expressions belong to the official style of weather forecasting ( "bright intervals" , "scattered showers" , etc), while other expressions ( "lovely day" , "a bit chilly" , etc) belong to the style of everyday conversational  remarks about the weather.
Style, then, pertains to parole : it is selection from a total linguistic repertoire that constitutes a style.
This definition does not take us very far, however.
In what follows, we shall narrow the scope of the term to something more adapted to the present purpose.
In practice, writers on style have differed a great deal in their understanding of the subject, and one source of disagreement has been the question "To what or whom do we attribute style?" 
In the broadest sense, STYLE can be applied to both spoken and written, both literary and non-literary varieties of language; but by tradition, it is particularly associated with written literary texts, and this is the sense of the term which will concern us.
Within the field of literary writing, there is again scope for varying definition and emphasis.
Sometimes the term has been applied to the linguistic habits of a particular writer ( "the style of Dickens, of Proust" , etc); at other times it has been applied to the way language is used in a particular genre, period, school of writing, or some combination of these: "epistolary style" , "early eighteenth-century style" , "euphuistic style" , "the style of Victorian novels" , etc.
All these uses seem natural and serviceable.
It would be artificial to limit our understanding of style to one of them, let us say authorial style, and exclude the others.
The only assumption one makes in using such expressions is that in the corpus of writings referred to there are some characteristic uses of language, which are capable of abstraction as a style.
Style is a relational term: we talk about "the style of x" , referring through "style" to characteristics of language use, and correlating these with some extralinguistic x, which we may call the stylistic DOMAIN.
The x (writer, period, etc) defines some corpus of writings in which the characteristics of language use are to be found.
But the more extensive and varied the corpus of writings, the more difficult it is to identify a common set of linguistic habits.
This applies even to the concept of authorial style.
Traditionally, an intimate connection has been seen between style and an author's personality.
This is urged by the Latin tag Stilus virum arguit ( "The style proclaims the man" ) and by many later studies and definitions.
For that matter, all of us are familiar with the experience of trying, and perhaps managing, to guess the author of a piece of writing simply on the evidence of his language.
Sometimes the author's identity is  given away by some small detail reflecting a habit of expression or thought, and this seems to confirm that each writer has a linguistic "thumbprint" an individual combination of linguistic habits which somehow betrays him in all that he writes.
But the distinctiveness of personal style can be overemphasized.
Even with a writer like Samuel Johnson, who seems to stamp his personality on all that he writes, there is a vast difference between the didactic and expository prose of the essays in The Rambler, the simpler narrative prose of much of Rasselas, and the more informal discursiveness of the private letters.
-If it is difficult to generalize about the style of an author, how much more difficult may it be to generalize about the style of a genre or an epoch.
The more general the domain, the more general, selective and tentative are the statements about its style.
This brings us to the most specific domain of style and the one which will be the main focus of this book: we shall be concerned primarily with the style of TEXTS.
A text, whether considered as a whole work or as an extract from a work, is the nearest we can get to a homogeneous and specific use of language.
It is therefore the natural starting place for the study of style.
In a text we can study style in more detail, and with more systematic attention to what words or structures are chosen in preference to others.
We can exhibit our material on the page and examine the interrelations between one choice of language and another.
We can thus put our study on a firmer basis of observation and evidence than if we took a broader domain.
Of course, it is natural to examine a text in the light of what we know of ambient domains — its author, the period in which it was written, and so on — and to regard it as exemplifying or representing something of more general interest.
But it is arguable that the soundness of statements about wider matters such as authorial style relies ultimately on the statements we can make about particular texts.
So if we think of style as "the linguistic characteristics of a particular text" , we shall be on the safest ground.
1.2 STYLISTICS
There is another reason why texts are the natural focus for our  study: within a text it is possible to be more specific about how language serves a particular artistic function.
Here we touch on the purpose of studying style, and hence on the nature of stylistics.
STYLISTICS, simply defined as the (linguistic) study of style, is rarely undertaken for its own sake, simply as an exercise in describing what use is made of language.
We normally study style because we want to explain something, and in general, literary stylistics has, implicitly or explicitly, the goal of explaining the relation between language and artistic function.
The motivating questions are not so much what, as why and how.From the linguist's angle, it is "Why does the author here choose to express himself in this particular way?" 
From the critic's viewpoint, it is "How is such-and-such an aesthetic effect achieved through language?" 
We should scarcely find the style of Henry James worth studying unless we assumed it could tell us something about James as a literary artist.
Style being a relational concept, the aim of literary stylistics is to be relational in a more interesting sense than that already mentioned: to relate the critic's concern of aesthetic appreciation with the linguist's concern of linguistic description.
(We use the term "appreciation" to comprehend both critical evaluation and interpretation, although it is with interpretation that stylistics is more directly concerned.)
A question which is often asked in this connection is "At which end do we start, the aesthetic or the linguistic?" 
But this question assumes that the task of stylistics is to provide a hard-and-fast technology of analysis, which is not the case.
The image used by Spitzer of the "philological circle" , the circle of understanding, is more appropriate Spitzer argued that the task of linguistic-literary explanation proceeded by the movement to and fro from linguistic details to the literary "centre" of a work or a writer's art.
There is a cyclic motion whereby linguistic observation stimulates or modifies literary insight, and whereby literary insight in its turn stimulates further linguistic observation.
This motion is something like the cycle of theory formulation and theory testing which underlies scientific method.
There is no logical starting point, since we bring to a literary text simultaneously two faculties, however imperfectly developed: our ability to respond to it as a literary work and our ability to observe its language.
The cycle is represented in Fig 1.1.
For completeness it must be mentioned that stylistics can have other goals than this.
Some of the more rigorous statistical studies of style have had the purpose of discovering the author of works of doubtful attribution.
Such investigations have tended to concentrate on linguistic traits which may not necessarily be artistically relevant, such as range of vocabulary sentence length or frequency of certain conjunctions on the principle that a writer's genuine "thumbprint" is more likely to be found in unobtrusive habits beyond conscious artistic control.
This forewarns us of the issue of SELECTION which will be taken up in Chapter 2.
In studying style, we have to select what aspects of language matter, and the principle of selection depends on the purpose we have in mind.
The authorship "detective" will try to identify features of text which remain constant whatever the artistic or other motives of the writer, whereas in literary stylistics features determined by artistic motivation are of primary interest.
Not surprisingly then, literary stylistics and attributional stylistics have tended to move in different orbits.
1.3 STYLE AND CONTENT
We have so far limited our interpretation of "style" and "stylistics" to match the kind of activity in which we wish to engage: the study of language as used in literary texts, with the aim of relating it to its artistic functions.
This does not deny the legitimacy of using these terms differently for other purposes.
But there is yet one further narrowing of the meaning of STYLE to consider, and this brings us on to more controversial ground, where different definitions of style involve conflicting views of the use of language in literature.
Such conflicting views or theories of style will concern us for the remainder of this chapter, but rather than argue that one view is wholly superior to another, we shall try to harmonize the apparent conflicts, so that at the end of the chapter, we shall have worked through to a balanced view of what stylistics is about.
There is a strong tradition of thought which restricts style to those choices which are choices of MANNER rather than MATTER, of EXPRESSION rather than CONTENT.
Some such separation is implied in the common definition of style as a way of writing "or a" mode of expression".
This approach may be called DUALIST, because it rests on an assumed dualism, in language, between form and meaning.
There is an equally strong academic and literary tradition which assumes the opposite; in Flaubert's words: "It is like body and soul: form and content to me are one.
Let us call this the MONIST view.
Controversy on this issue takes us back to the beginnings of literary theory: to Aristotle and Plato.
The controversy has not yet been settled.
1.3.1 Style as the "dress of thought" : one kind of dualism
The distinction between what a writer has to say, and how it is presented to the reader, underlies one of the earliest and most persistent concepts of style:that of style as the "dress of thought" .
Although this metaphor of style as some kind of "adornment" or "covering" of thought or meaning is no longer widely current, it frequently appears in Renaissance and rationalist pronouncements on style, and is implicit, for example, in Pope's well-known definition of wit: True wit is nature to advantage dressed, What oft was thought but ne'er so well expressed.
An Essay on Criticism
The fact that the "adornment" theory was entertained for so long deserves some explanation and its appropriateness cannot be altogether dismissed in the case of "artificial" styles cultivated by such Renaissance mannerists as Sidney and Lyly.
Take part of Lyly's description of his hero at the beginning of Euphues, which deserves our attention as "the first novel in English" : The elaborate parallelistic structure of these two sentences has been displayed above by placing the parallelisms or structural  equivalences, in brackets.
The parallelisms are reinforced by frequent alliteration, indicated by italics.
The architecture of parallelism is to some extent in conflict or in counterpoint with the grammatical structure of each sentence, so that the main verb (shown in capitals) occurs in mid-parallelism, and forms (continuing the architectural simile) a concealed centre of gravity, balancing subject against predicate.
It is obviously the aesthetics of form which tends to attract the reader's attention here, rather than the meaning.
We might almost go so far as to say that Lyly has embroidered an elaborate garment round the simple idea "Euphues was a young coxcomb" .
If "adornment" is to be identified in linguistic patterns which have no semantic utility, we can point to the alliterations clustered in the last few lines.
We can also point to grammatical parallelisms which, although not devoid of content, merely seem to have an elaborative function, providing further examples of a concept already expressed: "The sweetest rose hath his prickle" already conveys, by proverbial extension, the meaning "even the best things are alloyed with bad" , and to that extent, the repetition of the pattern in "the finest velvet his brack, the fairest flour his bran" , is redundant.Lyly might not, one imagines, have added his last piece of pattern, the similitude of sanctity, unless he had hit on the alliteration of "holiest head" and "wicked way" .
But however plausible the concept of stylistic embellishment appears, even in a favourable case like this there are difficulties.The elaboration of form inevitably brings an elaboration of meaning.
Even the repetition in parallel of examples from different spheres of experience ( "rose…velvet…flour…wit…head" ) enforces the generality of a didactic principle which is otherwise seen to be particular.
The repetition in "wit…wrath wisdom" is not mere repetition, but a progression implying an increasing weightiness of the qualities listed.
The parallelism of "inferior to none in pleasant conceits" and "superior to all in honest conditions" gives a schematic balance to the image of something light ( "pleasant conceits" ) being weighed against something heavy ( "honest conditions" ), underlining the faulty logic of Euphues's youthful mind.
So the schematism of form cannot be divorced from the schematic relation between the ideas being presented.
The "dress of thought" metaphor retains some appropriacy but only by virtue of an impression, difficult to justify, that the formal tail is wagging the semantic dog.
A converse implication of the "dress of thought" view is that it is possible to write in a style which is the nadir of plainness and neutrality.
As Wesley put it in an age stylistically more austere than that of Lyly: Style is the dress of thought; a modest dress, Neat, but not gaudy, will true critics please.
Pursuing the image further than the modesty of Wesley would permit, we could in theory have a manner of writing in which there is no style, in which content is presented in its nakedness.A more recent variant of this view is that of French stylisticians such as Bally and Riffaterre, that style is that expressive or emotive element of language which is added to the neutral presentation of the message itself.
So style need not occur in all texts: for example, Eliza's "Not bloody likely" in Pygmalion by Shaw has an expressiveness and therefore a style; while the otherwise equivalent monosyllable "No" does not.
More recently, another French writer, Roland Barthes, has referred to the "transparency of classical writing, and has postulated a mode of" writing at degree zero ", which," initiated by Camus's Outsider, achieves a style of absence which is almost an ideal absence of style".
If we take these views literally we arrive at the notion of style as an optional additive, and there is an obvious problem: how can we judge when the factor of style is absent?
Surely every word has some associations — emotive, moral, ideological — in addition to its brute sense.
It is true that in grammar some linguistic choices may be designated "unmarked" and "neutral" in contrast to others: for example, the choice of third-person pronouns (he, she, they, etc) may be regarded as neutral in narration as compared with I and you.
Yet the choice of such a neutral form is as much a linguistic choice as any other, and may have implications which may be fruitfully examined in stylistics: the third-person pronoun, for example, distances the author and the reader from the character it denotes.
So at least it is wiser, as a matter of terminological decision, to say that style is a property of all texts.
In theory, this still allows one to  postulate a completely "neutral" style, although in practice this postulate is difficult to sustain.
Once again, we can recognize a certain truth in what is otherwise a misleading conception of style.
It is hard to deny, from a commonsense reader's point of view, that texts differ greatly in their degree of stylistic interest or markedness; or that some texts are more transparent", in the sense of showing forth their meaning directly, than others.
Later, we shall try to give more substance to the metaphor of "transparency" and "opacity" in style (1 4).
But for all practical purposes, the idea of style as an "optional extra" must be firmly rejected.
1.3.2 Style as manner of expression: another kind of dualism
Thus we come to a more general and tenable version of dualism: that every writer necessarily makes choices of expression, and that it is in these choices, in his "way of putting things" , that style resides.
So understood, dualism can be contrasted with monism in simple diagrammatic terms as presented in Fig 1.2. fig1.2
In Fig 1.2 (A) and (B) show the contrast between dualism and monism from an author's point of view.
The dualist holds  that there can be different ways of conveying the same content.
The monist holds that this is a mistake, and that any alteration of form entails a change of content.
The dualist gains credence from the everyday use of the word "style" as a "manner of doing something" , as reflected in dictionary definitions, and as applied, outside language, to other art forms such as music, painting and architecture, and to varied activities such as playing the piano or playing tennis.
In such activities, there are assumed to be some INVARIANT elements which have to be performed (eg conforming to the rules of tennis), but that there are VARIANT ways in which the individual may perform them (eg in choice of backhands, forehands, volleys).
Such an analogy is used by Richard Ohmann, a modern apostle of dualism:
A style is a way of writing — that is what the word means.
In general,[style]applies to human action that is partly invariant and partly variable;…
Now this picture leads to few complications if the action is playing the piano or playing tennis…
But the relevant division between fixed and variable components in literature is by no means so obvious.
What is content, and what is form, or style?
The attack on a dichotomy of form and content has been persistent in modern criticism; to change so much as a word, the argument runs, is to change the meaning as well.
This austere doctrine has a certain theoretical appeal…
Yet at the same time this doctrine leads to the altogether counterintuitive conclusion that there can be no such thing as style or that style is simply a part of content.
To put the problem more concretely, the idea of style implies that the words on the page might have been different, or differently arranged without a corresponding difference in substance.
To back up the intuitive sense that there are "different ways of saying the same thing" , Ohmann (in the article quoted) enlists the authority of linguistics.
He offers the following among paraphrases of "After dinner, the senator made a speech" :[1]When dinner was over, the senator made a speech [2]A speech was made by the senator after dinner.
[3]The senator made a postprandial oration. and points out that these are variants of the original in a sense which is not true, for example, of "Columbus was brave" or "Columbus was nautical" .
Apart from the Johnsonian "postprandial oration" , the differences among [1]-[3]are chiefly grammatical rather than lexical; and the grammatical aspect of style is the one on which Ohmann concentrates.
He appeals to Transformational Grammar, which postulates two main kinds of rules, Phrase Structure Rules and Transformational Rules, and argues that optional Transformational Rules are the ones which determine style.
Informally, these are rules which change the form of a basic sentence type without changing its lexical content.
Thus one rule changes an active construction to a passive:[4]Columbus discovered American America was discovered by Columbus.
Other transformational rules have the effect of combining two or more simple sentence structures into a single more complex unit:[5]Night fell The wind freshened) Night fell and the wind freshened.
[6]We visited the house We visited the house, The house was still empty) which was still empty.
Still other rules cause the deletion of elements from the structure:[7]The house was empty and the house was neglected The house was empty and neglected.
Since such rules can be optionally applied to the same basic sentence structures, they provide a linguistic basis for the notion of * In this, as in subsequent chapters, we number examples and extracts only where we need to refer to them in the text.
paraphrase, and hence (according to Ohmann) for the grammar of style.
We can study in these terms what an author has written against the background of what he might have written, had he failed to apply certain transformations, or chosen to apply others instead.
For illustration, Ohmann hits on the device of reversing the effects of transformations, and pointing out the effect this artificial operation has on style.
He takes as an example a "typically Faulknerian" passage from The Bear, part of a labyrinthine sentence extending over nearly two pages.
Here we give only the first part of Ohmann's illustration:[8]the desk and the shelf above it on which rested the ledgers in which McCaslin recorded the slow outward trickle of food and supplies and equipment which returned each fall as cotton made and ginned and sold…
This is then "destransformed" as follows:[9]…the desk.
The shelf was above it.
The ledgers rested on the shelf.
The ledgers were old.
McCaslin recorded the trickle of food in the ledgers.
McCaslin recorded the trickle of supplies in the ledgers.
McCaslin recorded the trickle of equipment in the ledgers.
The trickle was slow.
The trickle was outward.
The trickle returned each fall as cotton.
The cotton was made.
The cotton was ginned.
The cotton was sold…
The resulting "Ohmannized" Faulkner consists of a sequence of short, atomic sentences, not far removed from the most elementary sentences, or KERNEL sentences,"postulated by the theory of Transformational Grammar that Ohmann uses.
Yet to arrive at this version, Ohmann has nullified the effect of only a few transformations: those transformations used to form coordinated sentences (cf[5]), relative clauses (cf [6]), and comparative clauses, together with certain deletion rules.
His point is that the elimination of these transformations also eliminates the Faulknerian quality of the passage, and that therefore Faulkner's style is distinguished by a heavy use of these transformations, which, in general terms, happen to be rules which introduce and condense syntactic complexity.
Ohmann goes on to apply this technique to passages regard  ed as characteristic of other authors: Hemingway, James, and Lawrence.
Predictably, the terse prose of Hemingway is found to lack the transformational complexities typical of Faulkner: which is not to say that Hemingway is innocent of transformations, only that he tends to use transformations of a different kind.
Although we cannot go into the technicalities of Ohmann's method, it is worth mentioning that the apparatus he used was that of an earlier version of Transformational Grammar, one which subsequently underwent profound modifications."
The assumption that transformations represent paraphrase relations has been undermined, for example, by consideration of cases in which the passive and deletion transformations illustrated in [4]and [7]do not preserve the same "logical content" : Many arrows did not hit the target The target was not hit by many arrows.
Some girls are tall and some girls are short Some girls are tall and short.
Such cases have led linguists to argue that transformations have a more complex interrelation with meaning than was assumed by Ohmann.
At the same time, the basic insight of Ohmann's approach continues to have linguistic validity: it is widely held that the basic logical content of a sentence can be represented as a (set of) elementary propositions, which, together with their interrelations, constitute its "deep structure" or "semantic representation" ."
The principle of paraphrase (or "same meaning in different form" ) is one which many schools of linguistic thought continue to take for granted as a basic fact of language.
But paraphrase, as the concept on which stylistic dualism is founded, itself depends on an agreed conception of "meaning" or "content" , two terms often used loosely and interchangeably.
It is useful here to replace these terms by terms whose use we can control more carefully.
Let us use SENSE to refer to the basic logical, conceptual, paraphrasable meaning, and SIGNIFICANCE to refer to the total of what is communicated to the world by a given sentence or text.
Dualism assumes that one can paraphrase the SENSE of a text, and that there is a valid separation of sense from significance.
Dualists do not in general treat stylistic  choices as devoid of significance: if they did, they would scarcely find style worth studying.
Rather, an enlightened dualist will search for some significance, which we may call STYLISTIC VALUE, in a writer's choice to express his sense in this rather than that way.
This view may be formalized in the equation: SENSE + STYLISTIC VALUE = (total) SIGNIFICANCE.
Ohmann's detransforming technique seems to provide some linguistic basis for the idea of stylistic "neutrality" mentioned in 1 3.1.
If a passage can be reduced to a set of elementary propositions of the kind approximately represented in [9], can we not regard this as the neutral, "styleless" version against which all other paraphrases, such as[8], are stylistically marked in varying degrees?
Such a claim would clearly be limited to the grammatical aspect of style, and even here, to say that a text has a "neutral style" is to mislead: the choice of expressing one's sense in elemental, disconnected sentences has its stylistic value as much as any other choice (see 7.4.2.).
Nevertheless, the degree to which a writer complicates his style by applying syntactic transformations might be one linguistic measure of markedness; we shall consider another such measure in the next section.
I 3.3 The inseparability of style and content: monism
The dualist's notion of paraphrase rests on the assumption that there is some basic sense that can be preserved in different renderings.
This possibility is not likely to be challenged in workaday uses of language.
But in literature, particularly in poetry, paraphrase"becomes problematic.
Every metaphor, for instance, confronts us with a paraphrase problem: Come, seeling night, Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day.
[Macbeth, III.ii.46]If asked to paraphrase this, do we try to expound the hidden, metaphorical meanings, or the surface literal meanings?
Can we even identify, for paraphrase purposes, what the underlying  meaning is?
As Terence Hawkes says,"Metaphor…is not fanciful embroidery of the facts.
It is a way of experiencing the facts".
Metaphor denies us a literal sense, and so induces us to make sense, ie to find interpretations beyond the truth-functional meaning captured by paraphrase.
Hence stylistic monism finds its strongest ground in poetry, where through such devices as metaphor, irony, and ambiguity, meaning becomes multivalued, and sense loses its primacy.
Monism, with its rejection of the form-meaning dichotomy, was a tenet of the New Critics, who rejected the idea that a poem conveys a message, preferring to see it as an autonomous verbal artefact.
 "A poem should not mean but be" was Archibald MacLeish' extreme statement of this position, and the strength of monism in the 1940s and 1950s can be gauged from Wimsatt's pronouncement: It is hardly necessary to adduce proof that the doctrine of identity of style and meaning is today firmly established.
The doctrine is, I take it, one from which a modern theorist can hardly escape, or hardly wishes to.
It was against the New Critics that Ohmann argued for the reinstatement of dualism in the passage already quoted.
But monism has had many other manifestations: in the philosophy of Croce, in the one-form-one-meaning postulate of pretransformational linguistics, and not least, in some authors' own sense of the artistic integrity and inviolability of their work; in Tolstoy's words: "This indeed is one of the significant facts about a true work of art — that its content in its entirety can be expressed only by itself." 
It is to be noted that this sentiment comes from a great prose writer.
The features that make poetry difficult for the dualist are not found exclusively in poetry: metaphor, for example, is found in the most prosaic of prose, not to mention everyday speech.
So it is not surprising that efforts have been made to apply New Critical methods to prose fiction.
David Lodge, in Language of Fiction, adopts a monist stance, arguing that there is no essential difference between poetry and prose, in so far as the following tenets apply to both:
(i) It is impossible to paraphrase literary writing;
(ii) It is impossible to translate a literary work;
(iii) It is impossible to divorce the general appreciation of a literary work from the appreciation of its style.
It is easy to see that both (i) paraphrase and (ii) translation, if understood as the expression of the same content in different words, presuppose a dualist philosophy.
As to tenet (iii), Lodge cites the case of Hardy, who has figured in criticism as "a great novelist" in spite of "gross defects" , including the "capacity to write badly" .
He opposes this view, by arguing that Hardy's so-called lapses of style cannot be considered apart from a more general consideration of his strengths and weaknesses as a novelist.
For fictional prose, as for poetry, New Criticism urges the view that criticism is, in essence, language criticism.
If a novel is no more and no less than a verbal artefact, there can be no separation of the author's creation of a fiction of plot, character, social and moral life, from the language in which it is portrayed.
As Lodge puts it: "The novelist's medium is language: whatever he does, qua novelist, he does in and through language." 
In keeping with this thesis, Lodge is prepared to see no difference between the kind of choice a writer makes in deciding to call a character dark or fair, and the choice between synonyms such as dark and swarthy.
All the choices he makes are equally matters of language.
l.4 COMPARING DUALISM AND MONISM
We can see the justice of Lodge's claim that there is no discontinuity between the way language is used in prose and in poetry.
But this conclusion should lead us to an accommodation between dualism and monism rather than the rejection of one in favour of the other.
The monist can be as easily floored by awkward questions as the dualist.
We can challenge the monist by simply asking "How is it possible to translate a novel?" 
Everyone seems to agree that it is easier to translate a novel than a poem: that one may appreciate the greatness of Dostoevsky in translation in a way that is not possible (say) of  Pushkin.
It is admittedly relatively easy for a monist to show (as Lodge does) that even the best translation of a prose work loses something of the original.
But this is not sufficient: the monist must show how translation is possible at all.
He must also show how it is possible to translate a novel into the visual medium, as a film.
To put it most simply, dualism is happier with prose, and monism with poetry.
But this oversimplifies a more complex situation.
If the difference between prose and poetry is defined at its most banal level, by the absence or presence of verse form, then some types of poetry are more "prosaic" than others, and some types of prose are more poetic,"than others.
Here we may confront Lodge with his fellow critic-novelist, Anthony Burgess, who in Joysprick: an introduction to the language of James Joyce, proposes a division of novelists into "Class 1" and "Class 2 A Class 1 novelist is one" in whose work language is a zero quality, transparent, unseductive, the overtones of connotation and ambiguity totally damped The Class 2 novelist is one for whom "ambiguities, puns and centrifugal connotations are to be enjoyed rather than regretted, and whose books, made out of words as much as characters and incidents, lose a great deal when adapted to a visual medium" .
James Joyce is a pre-eminently Class 2 novelist, and so for comparative purposes, Burgess offers us (tongue-in-cheek) a translation into Class 1 language of the opening of A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man.
We give here a brief sample both of the original [10]and of Burgess's Class 1 version [11]:[10]Once upon a time and a very good time it was there was a moocow coming down along the road and this moocow that was coming down along the road met a nicens little boy named baby tuckoo…
His father told him that story: his father looked at him through a glass: he had a hairy face.
He was baby tuckoo.
The moocow came down the road where Betty Byrne lived: she sold lemon platt.
[11]My earliest recollections are of my father and my mother bending over my cot and of the difference in personal odour that subsisted between my two parents.
My father, certainly, did not have so pleasant an odour as my mother.
I remember I would be told infantile stories, altogether appropriate to my infantile station.
One of them, I seem to recall, was concerned with a cow coming down the lane — which lane was never specified — and meeting a child who was called (I am embarrassed, inevitably, to recollect this in maturity) some such name as Baby Tuckoo.
I myself, apparently, was to be thought of as Baby Tuckoo.
Or was it Cuckoo?
It is, of course, so long ago…
We need not take Burgess's parody too seriously, nor need we accept the absoluteness of his Class 1 and Class 2 categories — since he himself acknowledges that the two classes overlap.
The main point is that prose varies a great deal in the amount of aesthetic interest which attaches to linguistic form.
This does not have to correspond with the aesthetic merit of the work as a whole: the opening of David Copperfield is in many respects more like the Class 1 sample than the Class 2 sample above.
But one can reasonably envisage a spectrum extending between two extremes of "language use" and "language exploitation" ; that is, between prose which conforms to the code (Saussure's langue) and normal expectations of communication, and prose which deviates from the code in exploring new frontiers of communication.
The Prague School of poetics has distinguished the "poetic function" of language by its FOREGROUNDING or DEAUTOMATIZATION of the linguistic code.
This means that the aesthetic exploitation of language takes the form of surprising a reader into a fresh awareness of and sensitivity to, the linguistic medium which is normally taken for granted as an "automatized" background of communication.
As the Joyce example shows, this foregrounding is not limited to the more obvious poetic devices, such as metaphor and alliteration.
It may take the form of denying the normally expected clues of context and coherence (see 6.3, 7.8).
Joyce confronts us with a piece of apparently inept, uncontextualized, childish language lacking normal "prosaic" logical transitions, and so shocks us into a re-experience (rather than a reminiscence) of the childhood consciousness from which the "young man's portrait" will gradually evolve in his novel.
The aesthetic theory of foregrounding or de-automatization enables us to see the references to TRANSPARENT and OPAQUE qualities of prose style (see 1.3.1) as more than vague metaphors.
Burgess's Class 1 prose is transparent in the sense that the reader need not become consciously aware of the medium through which sense is conveyed to him.
Class 2 prose is opaque in the sense that the medium attracts attention in its own right; and indeed, the interpretation of sense may be frustrated and obstructed by abnormalities in the use of the lexical and grammatical features of medium.
It will be enough to quote, in illustration of opacity, a few lines from the beginning of a novel noted for its linguistic singularity: Titus is seven.
His confines, Gormenghast.
Suckled on shadows; weaned, as it were, on webs of ritual: for his ears, echoes, for his eyes, a labyrinth of stone: and yet within his body something other — other than this umbrageous legacy.
For first and ever foremost he is child.
[Mervyn Peake, Gormenghast, Ch I]It is a justifiable paradox in language, as well as in other spheres, that to be truly creative, an artist must be destructive: destructive of rules, conventions, and expectations.
But in this sense, creativity of the writer also requires creativity from the reader, who must fill in the gaps of sense with an associative logic of his own.
So opacity can be equated with the extent to which the reader is required to be creative.
Opacity is also a useful metaphor because it correctly suggests there are many degrees of translucency of style between the extremes of (let us say) The Forsyte Saga and Finnegans Wake.
For most novels of literary merit, neither the dualist nor the monist doctrine will be entirely satisfactory.
There is need for an approach which avoids the weaknesses of both.
1.5 PLURALISM: ANALYSING STYLE IN TERMS OF FUNCTIONS
An alternative to both monism and dualism which is in some ways more enlightening than either is the approach which may fittingly be called stylistic PLURALISM.
According to the pluralist  language performs a number of different functions, and any piece of language is likely to be the result of choices made on different functional levels.
Hence the pluralist is not content with the dualist's division between "expression" and "content" : he wants to distinguish various strands of meaning according to the various functions.
That language can perform varied functions or communicative roles is a commonplace of linguistic thought.
The popular assumption that language simply serves to communicate "thoughts" or "ideas" is too simplistic.
Some kinds of language have a referential function (eg newspaper reports); others have a directive or persuasive function (eg advertising); others have an emotive function or a social function (eg casual conversation).
To this general appreciation of functional variety in language, the pluralist adds the idea that language is intrinsically multifunctional, so that even the simplest utterance conveys more than one kind of meaning.
For example, "Is your father feeling better?" may be simultaneously referential (referring to a person and his illness), directive (demanding a reply from the hearer), and social (maintaining a bond of sympathy between speaker and hearer).
From this point of view, the dualist is wrong in assuming that there is some unitary conceptual "content" in every piece of language.
Of the many functional classifications of language that have been proposed, three have had some currency in literary studies.
The oldest of the three is that of I. A. Richards, who in Practical Criticism (1929) distinguishes four types of function, and four kinds of meaning: sense, feeling, tone, and intention.
Jakobson's (1961) scheme is based on a more systematic theory of language, and distinguishes six functions (referential, emotive, conative, phatic, poetic, metalinguistic), each corresponding to one essential aspect of the discourse situation.
More recently still, Halliday's functional model of language acknowledges three major functions, which he calls "ideational" , "interpersonal" , and "textual" .
It can be seen that pluralists tend to disagree on what the functions are, and even on their number.
They also disagree on how functions are manifested in literary language.
Richards holds that in poetry the function of "feeling" tends to dominate that of "sense" , while Jakobson identifies a special "poetic" function, which can be found in many uses of language, but which dominates over other functions in poetry.
Although Halliday does not commit himself to a functional definition of literary language, he does recognize that different kinds of literary writing may foreground different functions.
We shall take a part of his analysis of the language of William Golding's novel The Inheritors to illustrate the relation of pluralism to dualism and monism.
(We shall also take Halliday's model as our example of pluralism, because its application to language, and in particular to grammar, has been worked out in considerable detail.)
The passage below illustrates the stylistic interest of Golding's novel: it deals with the prehistoric struggle for survival between homo sapiens and Neanderthal man, resulting in the latter's extinction.
The major part of the book presents events through the limited Neanderthal outlook of Lok.
The special Lok-style which Golding devises for this purpose differs considerably from the style he uses towards the end of the novel, when the point of view shifts to homo sapiens.
It is important to notice that the contrast lies primarily in the function of language which Halliday calls IDEATIONAL that is, the way in which language conveys and organizes the cognitive realities of experience, roughly corresponding to what we have earlier called "sense" :[12]The bushes twitched again.
Lok steadied by the tree and gazed.
A head and a chest faced him, half-hidden.
There were white bone things behind the leaves and hair.
The man had white bone things above his eyes and under the mouth so that his face was longer than a face should be.
The man turned sideways in the bushes and looked at Lok along his shoulder.
A stick rose upright and there was a lump of bone in the middle.
Lok peered at the stick and the lump of bone and the small eyes in the bone things over the face.
Suddenly Lok understood that the man was holding the stick out to him but neither he nor Lok could reach across the river.
He would have laughed if it were not for the echo of the screaming in his head.
The stick began to grow shorter at both ends.Then it shot out to full length again.
The dead tree by Lok's ear acquired a voice.
 "Clop!" 
His ears twitched and he turned to the tree.
[William Golding, The Inheritors]It requires careful attention to realize that here we are seeing, through the uncomprehending mind of Lok, a man's attempt to shoot him with an arrow.
Lok's view of things lacks the sense of cause and effect, of mind controlling matter, which we, as descendants of his vanquishers, take for granted.
A linguistic clue of this is the limited grammar of Lok's language, particularly its paucity of clauses with a direct object or clauses with a human subject.
Such clauses are the chief means by which we describe events in which human beings are involved: "Lok saw the man" , "The man raised his bow and arrow" .
Instead, Lok's language is full of clauses with inanimate subjects or intransitive verbs or both: "The bushes twitched again" , "Lok steadied by the tree" , "A stick arose upright" .
Further, there are no adverbs or adverbial phrases except those of time and place.
To represent the limited universe of Lok, Golding uses a limited language, particularly in the area of "transitivity" (a term which, for Halliday, comprehends relations between verbs, noun phrases, and adverbials in the clause).
Halliday goes on to claim that the theme of the whole novel, in a way, is "transitivity" : the linguistic pattern of choices realizes a primitive pattern of cognition, which in turn is the key to the tragic vision of the novel.
Halliday's analysis is revealing in the way it relates precise linguistic observation to literary effect.
But for our present purposes, its interest is that it locates stylistic significance in the ideational function of language; that is, in the cognitive meaning or sense which for the dualist is the invariant factor of content rather than the variable factor of style.
The choice, for example, between "A stick rose upright" and "He raised his bow" is not something which Ohmann could regard as a matter of style.
These sentences contrast grammatically in terms of phrase structure, and could not, in any logical sense, be regarded as paraphrases of one another.
There is thus an incompatibility between the pluralist and the dualist.
Comparing Ohmann and Halliday as representatives of  these two schools of thought, we can establish approximate correspondences as follows: OHMANN (1964) HALLIDAY (1970)(A) "content" (A) Ideational function (phrase structure)(B) "expression" (B) Textual function (optional transformations)(C)—(C) Interpersonal function (The equivalences here are very approximate, and are based on what Ohmann and Halliday actually do in their analyses, rather than their theoretical positions.
In particular, Halliday does not accept that his three functions form a hierarchy.)
For Ohmann, style belongs only to level (B), whereas for Halliday style can be located in (A),(B), and (C).
(The interpersonal function is something extra to which we shall return in Chapter 8.
It concerns the relation between language and its users, and combines two categories which are often kept separate in functional models: the affective or emotive function (communicating the speaker's attitudes), and the directive function (influencing the behaviour and attitudes of the hearer).
Although in his work using transformational grammar, Ohmann neglected this function, he has concentrated on it in subsequent work.)"
Halliday's view is that all linguistic choices are meaningful, and all linguistic choices are stylistic.
In this respect, his pluralism can be regarded as a more sophisticated version of monism.
The flaw of monism is that it tends to view a text as an undifferentiated whole, so that examination of linguistic choices cannot be made except on some ad hoc principle.
One might even argue that the monist, if he followed the logic of his position, would not be able to discuss language at all: if meaning is inseparable from form, one cannot discuss meaning except by repeating the very words in which it is expressed, and one cannot discuss form except by saying that it appropriately expresses its own meaning.
But the pluralist is in a happier position.
He can show how choices of language are interrelated  to one another within a network of functional choices.
What choices a writer makes can be seen against the background of relations of contrast and dependence between one choice and another; for example(to take a simple case) the choice between transitive and intransitive verbs.
Perhaps this is merely to say that the pluralist has a theory of language, whereas the monist does not.
1.6 A MULTILEVEL APPROACH TO STYLE
If Halliday's pluralism is superior to monism, it also has some advantages over dualism.
Dualism, as we have seen, can say nothing about how language creates a particular cognitive view of things, what Fowler calls MINDSTYLE as illustrated in the Golding passage.
This is a pity, since it thereby excludes much that is worthy of attention in modern fiction writing (see Ch 6).
But in 1.4 we argued that monism is more suited to opaque than transparent styles of writing, and the same point may be made about pluralism.
It is significant that Halliday discusses The Inheritors against the background of the theory of foregrounding, and that Golding's Lok-language in its opacity bears some resemblance to the language of the child Stephen in Joyce's portrait, as quoted in [10].
In both cases, the author.
shocks us into an unfamiliar mode of experience, by using language suggestive of a primitive state of consciousness.
Let us think again about what is good in the dualist position: it captures the insight that two pieces of language can be seen as alternative ways of saying the same thing: that is, that there can be STYLISTIC VARIANTS with different STYLISTIC VALUES.
This is not an unproblematic statement (as we saw in 1.4), but is sufficiently true of a wide enough range of cases not to be cast aside lightly.
By comparing a writer's choices against other choices with the same sense, "what the writer might have said but didn't" , one has a greater control over the notion of stylistic value.
Halliday's approach is one that is hard to reconcile with this everyday insight about "style" .
For him, even choices which are clearly dictated by subject matter are part of style: it is part of  the style of a particular cookery book that it contains words like butter, flour, boil and bake; and it is part of the style of Animal Farm that it contains many occurrences of pigs, farm, and Napoleon.
Even choice of proper names, or of whether to call a character fair or dark-haired, is a matter of style — in this Halliday the pluralist must agree with Lodge the monist.
Applied to non-fictional language, this position fails to make an important discrimination.
In a medical textbook, the choice between clavicle and collar-bone can justly be called a matter of stylistic variation.
But if the author replaced clavicle by thighbone, this would no longer be a matter of stylistic variation, but a matter of fact, and of potential disaster to the patient!
There is no reason to treat fictional language in a totally different way.
The referential, truth-functional nature of language is not in abeyance in fiction: rather it is exploited in referring to, and thereby creating, a fictional universe, a mock-reality.
So, from The Inheritors, we understand that certain things are going on in the fictional world.
These could have been described in other language, just as in Burgess's Class 1 version of Joyce's Portrait [11].
At the referential level, Golding's sentences:[13]The stick began to grow shorter at both ends.
[14]Then it shot out to full length again.
tell the same story as:[15]Lok saw the man draw the bow and release it.
Although these are not paraphrases, they can be regarded as stylistic variants in a more liberal sense: as alternative conceptualizations, or ways of "making sense" of the same event.
To see this is to recognize the stylistic value of Golding's choice: that his version of the event is of movements perceived in space and time, from which the reader has to work out a normal understanding of what is happening.
It is important to understand that language is used, in fiction, to project a world "beyond language" , in that we use not only our knowledge of language, the meanings of words etc, but also our general knowledge of the real world, to furnish it.
It is  important in this case, because only on this assumption can one explain the experience a reader gets from The Inheritors of "looking round the sides" of Lok's world view, to see a more substantial reality behind it.
It is as if we have two pairs of eyes, one pair inside and another outside the blinkers: without this, Golding's technique would not produce its ironic effect of dual vision.
It is reasonable to say, therefore, that some aspects of language have to do with the referential function of language, and that these must be distinguished from those which have to do with stylistic variation.
If Golding had replaced bushes by reeds, or river by pond, these would not have been stylistic variants, but would have brought about a change in the fictional world.
Returning now to the dualist's notion of invariant content and variable style, we can retain what is good in this distinction by refining it to allow for more than one level of stylistic variation.
The traditional term "content" fails to discriminate between the philosopher's concepts of SENSE and REFERENCE: what a linguistic form means, and what it refers to.
Once we take account of this distinction, we recognize that there can be alternative CONCEPTUALIZATIONS of the same event (illustrated in the Golding passage), as well as alternative syntactic expressions of the same sense (as in Ohmann's treatment of Faulkner).
The dualist's diagram (Fig 1.2) therefore splits into two: Fig1.3 (A) VARIANT (B) VARIANT CONCEPTUALIZATIONS EXPRESSIONS  The fiction remains the invariant element: the element which, from the point of view of stylistic variation, must be taken for granted.
But of course it is only invariant in a special sense: the author is free to order his universe as he wants, but for the purposes of stylistic variation we are only interested in those choices of language which do not involve changes in the fictional universe.
In this light, the view of Lodge, that whatever the novelist "does, qua novelist, he does in and through language" , is an attractive but slightly misleading truism.
It is undeniable that a novel, as a text, consists entirely of language, and that we gain access to the fictional world only through language.
But as a work of fiction, a novel has a more abstract level of existence, which in principle is partly independent of the language through which it is represented, and may be realize for example, through the visual medium of film.
In support of this it has been pointed out that two distinct kinds of descriptive statement can be made about a verbal work of art.
On the one hand, it can be described as a linguistic text: X contains simple words, more abstract than concrete nouns, etc.
X is written in ornate/lucid/vigorous/colloquial language, etc.
Or it can be described as we might describe other fictional forms, such as an opera, a play, a film, or even a mime, where there is no linguistic dimension at all: X contains several Neanderthal characters.
X is about a woman who kills her husband.
X is about events which take place in nineteenth century Africa.
These are all descriptive statements; that is, they are statements of a kind about which readers can readily agree, without appeal to critical judgment.
The way we acquire "knowledge" of a fictional world has much in common with the way we acquire indirect knowledge, through language, of the real world (see 5.2).
A novel has therefore these two interrelated modes of  existence — as a fiction, and as a text; and, to adapt Lodge's statement to our own purpose, it is as text-maker that the novelist works in language, and it is as fiction-maker that he works through language.
It is in this more general context, that the distinction between "what one has to say" and "how one says it" can ultimately be upheld.
We have arrived at a multilevel view of style, which is composed of elements of dualism and pluralism.
So far we have distinguished two levels of stylistic variation: that of sense reference, and that of syntax sense, but a further level will be added when we consider the multilevel coding of language in more detail in Chapter 4.
1.7 CONCLUSION: MEANINGS OF STYLE
Monism, dualism, pluralism, although apparently in conflict with one another, all have something to contribute to a comprehensive view of style.
It will be our object in this book to combine the insights from these approaches in a multilevel, multifunction view of style which will be applicable to the practical study of texts.
We shall not be dogmatic on the use of the term "style" itself.
Like many semitechnical terms, it has suffered from overdefinition, and the history of literary and linguistic thought is littered with unsuccessful attempts to attach a precise meaning to it.
All too often these attempts have resulted in an impoverishment of the subject.
We may conclude, however, with a list of points which have been made in this chapter, and which form the basis of the use of the term "style" in this book.
(i) Style is a way in which language is used: ie it belongs to parole rather than to langue.
(ii) Therefore style consists in choices made from the repertoire of the language.
(iii) A style is defined in terms of a domain of language use (eg what choices are made by a particular author, in a particular genre, or in a particular text).
(iv) Stylistics (or"the study of style) has typically (as in this book) been concerned with literary language.
(v) Literary stylistics is typically (again, as in this book) concerned with explaining the relation between style and literary or aesthetic function.
(vi) Style is relatively transparent or opaque: transparency implies paraphrasability; opacity implies that a text cannot be adequately paraphrased, and that interpretation of the text depends greatly on the creative imagination of the reader.
We come finally to a statement which is controversial, and about which much of this chapter has been concerned:(vii) Stylistic choice is limited to those aspects of linguistic choice which concern alternative ways of rendering the same subject matter.
This defines a more restricted concept of style, which may be called STYLE, to distinguish it from the notion of style as linguistic choice in general, STYLE.
We have argued in favour of the tenet which underlies (vii), namely that it is possible to distinguish between what the writer chooses to talk about, and how he chooses to talk about it.
This means that the study of the literary function of language can be directed towards the STYLISTIC VALUES associated with STYLISTIC VARIANTS, that is, with forms of language which can be seen as equivalent in terms of the "referential reality" they describe.
This principle is questionable when it comes to more opaque varieties of literary language, where the writer tends towards the innovative techniques of poetry.
Here, the study of foregrounding and its interpretation is likely to be a better guide to the aesthetic function of language than the study of stylistic variants.
In other words, there is no one model of prose style which is applicable to all texts.
This is one reason why we do not restrict the use of "style" to what we have called stylistic variation, ie "styled" .
It is best to acknowledge that "style" , like "meaning" , is a word which can be used either in a broader or a narrower sense.
In practice, little danger lies in this ambiguity.
Styled is the concept we shall use in exploring the nature of stylistic value, as a basis for understanding the detailed workings of stylistic effect (see Ch 4).
Style, the more general concept, lies at the back of more large  scale studies of style, when for example we try to give a stylistic characterization of a whole text.
In such studies, to which we turn in the next chapter, it will be necessary to consider yet other components which have frequently entered into the definition of style.
Style, text and frequency
In talking about USE and CHOICE in Chapter 1 we were implicitly looking at language from the author's point of view.
Now, in turning to style as recurrence, pattern, frequency we find ourselves taking the reader's point of view.
The question we shall consider in this chapter is: How, as readers, do we investigate the style of a text?
Once again, we shall take as a starting point the ordinary use of the word "style" .
Generally, in looking at style in a text, one is not interested in choices in isolation, but rather at a pattern of choices: something that belongs to the text as a whole.
Suppose we choose between active and passive sentences, saying "Persuasion was written by Jane Austen" in preference to "Jane Austen wrote Persuasion" .
This is a choice (whether conscious or unconscious is a different matter), but could scarcely be called a style.
On the other hand, if a text shows a repeated preference for passives over actives, it is natural to consider this preference a feature of style.
It is not that stylistics is uninterested in this or that local feature of a text; but rather that local or specific features have to be seen in relation to other features, against the background of the pervasive tendency of preferences in the text.
The recognition of cohesion and consistency in preference is important: without it, one would scarcely acknowledge a style.
To go one stage further: "consistency" and "tendency" are most naturally reduced to "frequency" and so, it appears, the stylistician becomes a statistician.
2.1 THE PROBLEM OF "MEASURING" STYLE
If style is regarded as a function of frequency, it seems reason  able to suppose that style can be measured.
Some definitions of style have been based on this assumption.
An example often quoted is that of Bernard Bloch, who defined the style of a text as"the message carried by the frequency distributions and transitional probabilities of its linguistic features, especially as they differ from those of the same features in the language as a whole Such definitions appeal to the empiricist, who would like to reduce a subjectively perceived phenomenon to something objective, but they tend to alarm the student of literature.
We hope to reassure the latter by showing that quantification is a less essential part of stylistics than this definition suggests.
The principle underlying Bloch's formulation is simple enough.
To find out what is distinctive about the style of a certain corpus or text we work out the frequencies of the features it contains and then measure these figures against equivalent figures which are "normal" for the language in question.The style is then to be measured in terms of deviations — either higher frequencies or lower frequencies — from the norm.
Many impressionistic statements about style would gain meaning from such a comparison.
We often read statements or suggestions that writer X "favours" , "is fond of" ,"tends to use language feature Y: for example, that Hemingway tends to use short sentences, or that Johnson favours abstract vocabulary.
Such statements may be based on strong conviction and close observation, and may even be felt to be self-evident, but they appear to have no empirical status — are merely, we might say, guesses — unless supported by frequency data.
Under Bloch's type of analysis, the statement that Hemingway uses"short sentences amounts to a claim that the average length of a Hemingway sentence is shorter (to a significant extent) than the average length of an English sentence: something which can in principle be verified or falsified.
But even this simple illustration exposes the difficulties of the quantitative definition of style.
How does one determine the average length of an English sentence?
Does one use conversation, written prose, modern novels, etc, as one's standard for determining the norm of "the language as a whole" ?
None of these individually could be regarded as representative.
To arrive at the average length of an English sentence, one should ideally amass a complete corpus of the language at a given  period.
Leaving aside the problem of what time period to specify, we should have to ransack the libraries of the world to find a complete list of published works written during the period.
This would still leave out manuscript compositions (eg private letters) and spoken language (eg private conversations).
The operation would be totally impracticable.
Even if it were not, there would be other problems, such as whether a book read by millions would count equally, in the corpus, with a private letter; whether some publications (eg literary magazines) would be weightier, in determining the norm for the language, than others.
In this situation the obvious resort is to sampling; but without some clearcut notion, for statistical purposes, of what is meant by "the language as a whole" , any, sampling procedure is bound to involve subjective decisions.
The norm of "the language as a whole" is not the objective reality that it seems to be in Bloch's definition, and some less absolute standard of comparison has to be found (see 2.4).
Not to overdo the argument against objectivity, we should mention that there are fairly reliable statements to be made about the statistical properties- of language particularly about categories of great frequency.
For example, the frequencies of vowels and consonants (in speech) of letters (in writing), of word classes and of common words are relatively constant from one variety of English to another.
Such categories, however, do not take us very deeply into the study of style.
In general, we must find our statistical bearings through more specific standards of comparison, written English having a different set of norms from spoken English, and so on .
A second and more serious objection to this definition concerns the impossibility of completeness in another direction.
How is it possible to list exhaustively all linguistic features that may be found in a text?
For this, as a first condition, we should require a completely exhaustive description of the language: its lexicon, its syntax, its semantics, and other characteristics.
Languages are such complicated systems, and so open-ended, that no complete descriptions have been produced, even for a well studied language such as English.
Many linguists would place the conception of "an agreed complete description of English" in the realms of fancy.
Even if there were such a description it would be difficult to imagine the number of  working years it would take to arrive at a complete frequency description of a novel, let alone "the language as a whole" .
Bloch includes in the measurement of style "transitional probability" , the probability that some form X will be followed by another form Y; this opens the door to an infinity of combinations of stylistic factors that might reasonably enter into a definition of a style.
Frequencies of word occurrences could be augmented, for example, by frequencies of word co occurrences, or COLLOCATlONS.
This means that in addition to the separate frequencies of the words silver and moon, we should determine the frequency of their combination (silver moon).
But why stop at juxtaposition?
Why not extend the study to co occurrence within the same phrase (moon in a silver sky) or within the same sentence (the moon stared down with its silver eye)?
There would also be combinatory frequencies of a different kind, where two categories are simultaneously present in a single item.
Examples of such coincident categories are monosyllabic verbs (combining the phonological category of syllable with the syntactic category of verb), and colour adjectives (combining the syntactic category of adjective with the semantic category of colour).
The study of combinatory frequencies is open-ended.
This would seem an over-subtle argument, were it not that studies of style often indicate the importance of such combinatory features in the creation of literary effect.
Onomatopoeic effects are generally of this kind, as we see from the opening sentence of D. H. Lawrence's Odour of Chrysanthemums (see 3.4): The small locomotive engine, Number 4, came clanking, stumbling down from Selston with seven full wagons.
The sense of listening to and "feeling" the motion of the locomotive is created by a combination of rhythm (the trochaic regularity of "clanking, stumbling, down from Selston" ), the dragging effect of consonant clusters (/kl/, /nk), /mbl/, /lst/), and the actual qualities of the consonants themselves (eg the hard effect of the stop consonants /k/, /k/, /t/, /b/).
In the past, the study of onomatopoeia, and of imitative effects generally, has been vitiated by a tendency to assume that there is a direct  evocative connection between a particular sound and a particular reference, say between an /s/ sound and the sighing of the wind or (here) the hiss of a steam-engine.
But onomatopoeia is on stronger ground if it is appreciated that the effect is generally a result of phonological features acting in combination with one another, and in combination with meaning.
Similarly on the syntactic level, individual features are likely to have a less significant effect than features in combination.
The frequency of a particular kind of syntactic structure (say a relative clause) will probably be less important than the fact that that structure tends to occur in a particular position in the sentence (eg at the end, or at the middle).
Traditional stylistic terms (eg that of the periodic sentence — see 7.5.3) although often ill-defined, seem to refer to such configurations of categories.
Stylistics, that is, often uses not categories of the language as such, but special stylistic categories, derived, by abstraction and combination, from more basic linguistic categories.
It seems, then, that the list of linguistic features to be counted is indefinitely large, if we want a quantitative description of a text to have a fine enough mesh to catch the linguistic details which contribute to readers"feeling for differences of style.
The quest for a completely objective measurement of style must be abandoned on this score, as well as on that of determining frequencies for the language as a whole.
2.2 THE USES OF ARITHMETIC
In rejecting the "fallacy of objectivity" in stylistics, we may have seemed to be labouring the obvious.
But it is important to be aware of the limitations of the statistical concept of style before going on to a more realistic assessment of its value.
If some studies of style are of doubtful value because of their emphasis on quantitative methods, the opposite tendency to rely entirely on what we may call stylistic intuition has, if anything, been even more prevalent.
Aesthetic terms"used in the discussion of style (urbane, curt, exuberant, florid, lucid, plain, vigorous, etc) are not directly  referable to any observable linguistic features of texts, and one of the long-term aims of stylistics must be to see how far such descriptions can be justified in terms of descriptions of a more linguistic kind.
The more a critic wishes to substantiate what he says about style, the more he will need to point to the linguistic evidence of texts; and linguistic evidence, to be farm, must be couched in terms of numerical frequency.
I may "observe" , from close familiarity with her novels, that Jane Austen favours abstract nouns of a particular kind (nouns referring to moral qualities such as right, vice, propriety, injustice).
Perhaps no one will doubt the correctness of my observation.
But what if another person has "observed" that Jane Austen has no such stylistic propensity?
If challenged, I ought to be, and can be, in a position to support my claim with quantitative evidence.
 "Observation" here misleadingly refers to something it would be safer to call an intuition or a hunch (even if it may be a sensitive reader's well-informed hunch) that such-and-such is the case.
I shall only be able to convince another person that such-and-such is the case if I take the trouble to present evidence which is available to both my challenger and myself.
So let us see quantitative stylistics as serving a role in the "circle of explanation" (see Fig 1.1) as follows.
On the one hand, it may provide confirmation for the "hunches" or insights we have about style.
On the other, it may bring to light significant features of style which would otherwise have been overlooked, and so lead to further insights; but only in a limited sense does it provide an objective measurement of style.
Moreover the role of quantification depends on how necessary it is to prove one's point.
The escape from intuition in the study of style leads inevitably in the direction of quantification.
But intuition has a respectable place both in linguistics and criticism, and the work of the stylo-statistician too often makes him seem, in Dr Johnson's words, "the stately son of demonstration, who proves with mathematical formality what no man has yet pretended to doubt" .
Style is such a complicated phenomenon"that it would be impractical to demand hard evidence for every observation made.
It may be sufficient for many purposes just to enumerate textual examples of the feature under discussion.
In many other cases, one may agree with Halliday that "a rough indication of frequencies is often just what is needed: enough to  suggest why we should accept the analyst's assertion that some feature is prominent in the text, and allow us to check his statements" .
Others would go further, and insist on more rigorous methods.
The essential point is that the use of numerical data should be adapted to the need.
2.3 DEVIANCE, PROMINENCE, AND LITERARY RELEVANCE
"The role of quantitative evidence can be understood more clearly if we look at the interrelation of the three concepts of DEVIANCE, PROMINENCE, and LITERARY RELEVANCE.
Leaving aside for the moment the problem of determining a norm, we may define deviance as a purely statistical notion: as the difference between the normal frequency of a feature, and its frequency in the text or corpus.
Prominence is the related psychological notion: Halliday defines it simply as "the general name for the phenomenon of linguistic highlighting, whereby some linguistic feature stands out in some way" ."
We assume that prominence of various degrees and kinds provides the basis for a reader's subjective recognition of a style.
Halliday distinguishes prominence from literary "relevance" , which he calls "value in the game" .
Like Halliday, we shall associate literary relevance with the Prague School notion of FOREGROUNDING, or artistically motivated deviation, as discussed in 1.4.
Foregrounding may be QUALITATIVE, ie deviation from the language code itself — a breach of some rule or convention of English — or it may simply be QUANTITATIVE, ie deviance from some expected frequency.
The question stylistics must consider is: how are these three concepts of deviance, prominence, and foregrounding interrelated?
First, let us consider the relation between prominence and deviance.
Prominence must obviously be understood in relative terms: if features can register on a reader's mind in his recognition of style, the degree to which they are salient will vary, and the degree to which the reader responds in a given reading will also vary according to a number of factors, such as his attentiveness, sensitivity to style and previous reading experience.
But this ability to react to what is "noticeable" in style  must underlie our ability to recognize one passage as Dickensian, another as Jamesian, and so on.
We may go so far as to suggest that each reader has a "stylistic competence" , analogous to and additional to the "linguistic competence" shared (according to Chomsky) by all native speakers of a language.
The analogy holds in so far as stylistic competence, like linguistic competence, is a capacity which we possess and exercise unconsciously and intuitively: only with special training can it be turned into explicit knowledge.
But unlike Chomsky's ideal linguistic competence, stylistic competence is an ability which different people possess in different measure, so that although there may be a great deal in common between different English speakers"responsiveness to style, allowance must be made for differences of degree and kind.
We presume a fairly direct relation between prominence (psychological saliency) and deviance (a function of textual frequency).
It is reasonable to suppose that a sense of what is usual or unusual or noticeable in language is built up from a lifelong experience of linguistic use, so that we are able to affirm with reasonable confidence and without resort to a pocket calculator (to take a simple case already mentioned) that Hemingway favours short sentences.
It is in this sense that statistics may be an elaborate way of demonstrating the obvious.
But it would be hazardous to assume that prominence and deviance are simply subjective and objective aspects of the same phenomenon.
This is first because of the individual differences in stylistic competence already noted; secondly because our sense of style is essentially vague and indeterminate, not reducible to quantities; and thirdly because it is likely that certain deviances (below a certain level of significance) do not reach the threshold of response, even for the most experienced, alert, and sensitive reader.
Both prominence and deviance have a negative, as well as a positive side: a feature which occurs more rarely than usual is just as much a part of the statistical pattern as one which occurs more often than usual; and it may also be a significant aspect of our sense of style.
Recall that in Halliday's analysis of Lok's language, the rarity of certain categories (eg transitive verbs) was just as important as the high frequency of others: the most striking features of Lok's language were its limitations.
Like the relation between prominence and deviance, that between prominence and literary relevance or foregrounding is not a one-to-one match.
Prominence, which is the basis for our sense of the particularity of a style, also provides the condition for recognition that a style is being used for a particular literary end: that it has a "value in the game" .
But there is an additional condition: we should be able to see a prominent feature of style as forming a significant relationship with other features of style, in an artistically coherent pattern of choice.
According to Mukarovsky, it is the "consistency and systematic character of foregrounding" , not just the isolated occurrence of this or that prominent feature, which is the distinguishing mark of literary language.
Instances can be cited where this appears not to be the case: where prominence is due to other than literary considerations.
Swift's dislike of monosyllables and Dryden's avoidance of final prepositions "are cases of a writer's preferences being guided by a general sense of linguistic propriety, of what is good English" .
Lesser writers could provide many examples of idiosyncrasies of style which have no discernible literary function.
In other cases, there is room for disagreement.
It may be a relevant feature of the later style of Henry James that he favours manner adverbs, and avoids adjectives.
James himself seems to have felt an aesthetic reason for these propensities, for he is reported to have said: "Adjectives are the sugar of literature and adverbs the salt.
"Whatever the force of this cryptic remark, it is up to us as readers to find a value for these preferences, or else to dismiss them as the outcome of prejudice or eccentricity.
The dividing line between foregrounding and unmotivated prominence must be drawn in principle: where it is drawn in practice depends on a coherent literary interpretation of style.
To conclude, we may place the three notions of saliency in an ordered relation as follows: Fig2.1 literary psychological statistical RELEVANCE----------------PROMINENCE------------DEVIANCE (foregrounding) We interpret the arrow in "X — Y" to mean "all instances of X are instances of Y" ."
But in the opposite direction, the relation does not hold.
In other words, deviance can be used to suggest and support hypotheses about style; but nothing can be adduced from, or proved by, statistics alone.
2.4 RELATIVE NORMS
It is time to return to the question of "norm" on which the notion of deviance depends.
Given that the ideal of a completely objective description of style is a myth, we can only aim at RELATIVELY reliable statements about what is frequent or infrequent in a text.
Some kind of comparison outside the text or corpus is necessary, otherwise statements of frequency are vacuous.
For example, discovering that x per cent of Gibbon's nouns are concrete, and only y per cent abstract is of little use by itself.
This might be treated as evidence that Gibbon uses an abnormally large number of abstract nouns, but of course it cannot, for we might then discover that a preponderance of abstract nouns is quite normal in the prose of Gibbon's contemporaries, and that Gibbon's language in this respect is not exceptional.
We might even discover that he uses a lower number of abstract nouns than other writers of his time.
Thus what at first appeared to be evidence in favour of one hypothesis might turn out to be evidence against it.
This example teaches us that a statement "x is frequent in A" is only meaningful if it acts as a shorthand for "x is more frequent in A than in B" .
This object lesson leads to the use of a RELATIVE NORM of comparison (B in the above formula).
Where an absolute norm for English cannot be relied on, the next best thing is to compare the corpus whose style is under scrutiny with one or more comparable corpuses, thus establishing a relative norm.
For example, Milic, in his study of Swift's prose style, confirms Swift's predilection for clause connectives by comparing his results for a sample of Swift with those for equivalent samples of Addison, Johnson, and Macaulay: Swift's habit of reinforcing connections between clauses sometimes reaches the extreme of sequences such as and therefore if notwithstanding…
Milic sees this habit as having a role in Swift's persuasive rhetoric: as helping to create an impression of consummate logical clarity.
Table 2.1 is fairly convincing, since there is a strong supposition that the markedly lower figures for other writers come closer to an absolute norm than those for Swift.
The more comparable writers we study, the less likely it is that they are out of step with the norm of the language rather than Swift.
The same technique may be used within the canon of a single author.
For instance, Corbett, in support of the observation that Swift uses abnormally long sentences in A Modest Proposal, cites a much lower sentence length from a sample from A Tale of a Tub.
The long sentences in Swift's ironic essay in support of cannibalism are explicable as a stylistic expression of the persona he adopts in order to intensify the impact of his outrageous proposal: in Corbett's words, we seem to be "listening to a man who is so filled with his subject, so careful about qualifying his statements and computations, so infatuated with the sound of his own words, that he rambles on at inordinate length" The greater the range and size of the corpus which acts as a relative norm, the more valid the statement of relative frequency.
But a small sample for comparison is better than nothing at all.
There are manifest dangers in the way a relative norm is chosen, but once it is accepted that relative validity is all we can aim at these need not worry us unduly.
It is obvious that a suitable norm of comparison should be what Enkvist calls "a contextually related norm" There would be little point in comparing Jane  Austen's style with that of contemporary legal writs or twentieth-century parliamentary reports.
What counts as"the same category of writing however, can be defined to different degrees of narrowness.
The books of Jane Austen could be compared (a) with other prose writings of the period,(b) with other novels of the period,(c) with other novels with similar subject matter, and so forth.
The narrower the range of comparison, the surer we shall be that the stylistic features we are attributing to Jane Austen are peculiar to her style, rather than to the style of a larger category of writings"which includes hers.
In adopting the necessary expedient of a relative norm, quantitative stylistics abandons the idea that there is a single way of measuring deviance in a text.
There are as many measures as there are relative norms.
This conclusion is not a bad thing, for it leads to a better match between deviance and prominence.
What was overlooked in our discussion of stylistic competence is that our intuitive "placing" of a text depends not on an undifferentiated capacity to compare a text with the norm of the language, but rather on a responsiveness to a set of norms: a norm for spoken conversation, a norm for news reporting, a norm for writing diaries, a norm for historical novels, etc.
However inchoate the norms may be, they collectively give us our bearings for responding to a style.
They account for our general sense of the appropriacy and inappropriacy of language as reflected in impromptu observations about style, varying from Queen Victoria's remark on Mr Gladstone that "he speaks to Me as if I were a public meeting" , to more everyday comments like "No one would ever speak like that" , and to attributions like colloquial, journalistic, biblical, childlike, pedantic.
Thus prominence, like deviance, is best understood in terms of relative norms: the set of expectancies we have acquired as speakers, hearers, readers, and writers, varies from one kind of language situation to another.
At the same time it must be borne in mind that in literature, prominence and deviance  frequently take a more extreme form (for example in the Gormenghast passage on p 29) which would show up against practically any norm we should choose; this more general deviance can be demonstrated by taking one's relative norms from as broad a range as possible.
The concept of relative norm also explains a more wholesale kind of deviance: the adoption, in literature, of a style borrowed from some "foreign" norm.
This phenomenon of STYLE BORROWING has many manifestations in prose: the child language at the beginning of Joyce's Portrait is an example we have already noted; others are the style of private correspondence used in epistolary novels such as Pamela; the racy colloquialism of first-person novels such as The Catcher in the Rye; the use of stylistic parody and pastiche as exemplified in Ulysses.
In such cases the recognition of style involves awareness of deviation from one norm (the norm of a particular writer, genre, period, register to which the text owes its provenance), and approximation to another contrasting norm.
The adopted norm may of course(as in the case of the epistolary novel) become a literary norm or a convention in itself.
But the mimetic, borrowed origin of the norm is still relevant.
2.5 PRIMARY AND SECONDARY NORMS
Style borrowing is thus a telling illustration of a principle on which Halliday insists: that prominence is not only "departure from a norm" but "attainment of a norm" .
In one case "attainment of a norm" will mean style borrowing: the approximation to some external norm as a "disguise" or at least as a point of reference.
In another case it will mean that the writer creates his own special kind of language: and it is in this sense that Halliday applies it to the Neanderthal language of The Inheritors.
In this novel, he argues, the particular pattern of frequencies sets up its own expectancies, and the consequence is that we can generalize beyond the text, and judge whether a particular non-occurring sentence would be appropriate to its "language" or not.
He shows, for instance, that "A branch curved downwards over the water" could have easily occurred in the language of Lok, while "He had very quickly broken off the lowest branches" would be highly deviant.
The norm which is "attained" by stylistic consistency in a text might be called a SECONDARY NORM, since it is established by deviance from the PRIMARY (relative) NORMS which determine our more general expectations of language.
Golding's novel is to some degree experimental in style, and when we read it, we sense there is something "odd" about Lok's language.
This we do by reference to primary norms.
But when we consider what might be deviant in terms of Lok's own "dialect" , we refer to the secondary norm.
2.6 INTERNAL DEVIATION
The recognition that a text may set up its own secondary norms leads to a further conclusion, that features of language within that text may depart from the norms of the text itself: that is, they may "stand out" against the background of what the text has led us to expect.
This is the phenomenon of INTERNAL DEVIATION, which, although it is most striking in poetry, may equally well be observed in prose style.
Internal deviation explains the prominence, not uncommon in prose fiction, of an ordinary, even banal piece of language which seems to gain its impact from the context in which it is found.
A sudden variation in sentence complexity may help to give this effect: Norman Page points out that at the beginning of Jane Austen's Emma, the three-word sentence "Miss Taylor married" stands out momentously against a background of longer sentences (the average sentence length for the first five paragraphs of the novel being 26.5 words).
A similar case is the sentence (7) which ends the opening paragraph of The Secret Sharer (3.3) Example 1) where the brevity of the sentence "And then I was left alone with my ship, anchored at the head of the Gulf of Siam" contrasts with the complexities of the preceding scene-setting sentences, as if to emphasize the insignificance of the lonely narrator against his background, the sea.
The opposite case, where the departure from the norm is in the direction of sentence complexity rather than simplicity, is illustrated in Hemingway's The Old Man and the Sea: the culmination of the Old Man's battle with the fish is related in (for Hemingway) unusually complex sentences, conveying a climactic frenzy of  movement against the background of Hemingway's more usual simplicity of style.
The contrast can only be appreciated if we first quote a more characteristic passage from the same episode:[i]That way nothing is accomplished, he thought.
His mouth was too dry to speak but he could not reach for the water now.
I must get him alongside this time, he thought.
I am not good for many more turns.
Yes you are, he told himself.
You're good for ever.
On the next turn he nearly had him.
But again the fish righted himself and swam slowly away.
[2]He took all his pain and what was left of his strength and his long-gone pride and he put it against the fish's agony and the fish came over onto his side and swam gently on his side, his bill almost touching the planking of the skiff, and started to pass the boat, long, deep, wide, silver and barred with purple and interminable in the water.
The old man dropped the line and put his foot on it and lifted the harpoon as high as he could and drove it down with all his strength, and more strength he had just summoned, into the fish's side just behind the great chest fill that rose high in the air to the altitude of the man's chest.
He felt the iron go in and he leaned on it and drove it further and then pushed all his weight after it.
[Ernest Hemingway, The Old Man and the Sea, illus edn 19 pp 84–7]
2.7 PERVASIVE AND LOCAL CHARACTERISTICS OF STYLE
Internal deviation draws attention to a limitation of the view of style with which this chapter started.
It was assumed that when we talk of "a style" or "the style of X" we refer to what is pervasive or recurrent in a text.
This is true as a matter of general usage, but there is no reason why stylistics should not cover local and individual, as well as general and pervasive aspects of linguistic choice.
It may be less important to examine the "lowest common denominator" of linguistic usage throughout a work than to study style as a dynamic phenomenon: as  something which develops through peaks and valleys of dramatic tension, which not only establishes expectancies, but which frustrates and modifies them as a work progresses.
In this dynamic perspective, pervasive and local features of style are equally parts of the pattern.
The concepts of deviation, prominence, and foregrounding may be given an individual, as well as a frequential interpretation.
At the same time the pervasive features are an essential background, against which local features become contrastively salient.
2.8 VARIATIONS IN STYLE
But the "pervasive" view of style also has to confront the fact that there may be a multiplicity of styles within the same work.
Such stylistic variation can follow various patterns.
An evolutionary pattern is one.
In his Portrait, Joyce offers a development of style corresponding to his hero's development from the dawning of linguistic consciousness, in childhood, to maturity.
More ambitiously, in the Scylla and Charybdis episode of Ulysses, he offers a recapitulation, through parody, of English literary history.
Another kind of pattern is alternation.
In Bleak House, the impersonal ironic voice of the author is interspersed with the more humanly involved voice of Esther.
In Faulkner's The Sound and the Fury, four "narrators" take it in turn to present their vision of events to the reader.
A quantitative method can still be applied to these cases, if stylistically homogeneous sections can be separated out as different "texts" within the same work.
This can lead to revealing internal comparisons: Halliday, for example, compares the Neanderthal style in The Inheritors with the "homo sapiens style" and a third, transitional style in the same novel.
It is less easy to reconcile the "pervasive" approach with a more general and subtle type of stylistic shift which must be found, to some extent, in every novel.
This is the adaptation of style, sometimes abrupt, sometimes gradual, to the ongoing narrative focus, with its changes of tone, mood, and subject.
The variation of style with tone (see 8. s) is supremely exemplified in Dickens; and we may take, for illustration, four passages from the earlier part of Dombey and Son, in which style  variation is intrinsic to the novel's satiric-epic picture of Victorian urban society, concentrating on the capitalist house of Dombey.
The book begins, with the description of father and son at the latter's birth; the following paragraph is so formal in its rhetorical design, balancing each element of Mr Dombey's description against a similar element of the description of Paul, that we may set it out in tabular form (reading the columns from left to right): This is a brief glimpse of one kind of language which recurs at intervals throughout the book, especially at symbolic and ceremonial points in the fortunes of the Dombey family: births, funerals, and marriages.
It is poised between comedy and moral seriousness, and the dominant note of irony is struck in the balancing of father and son, and in the reiterated unmodified nouns Dombey and Son — appropriate references to individuals  whose lives are respectively dedicated and mortgaged to the gods of family pride and commerce.
The tone is maintained by an armoury of traditional rhetorical devices: anaphora, parallelism (with antithesis), personification.
At the same time, the formalism is broken up (particularly in the last and longest sentence) by elements which will ease transition to a lighter tone of comedy: for example, the bantering irony signalled by the parenthesis of "though (of course ) an undeniably fine infant" (directed against a general human frailty, partiality of parents for their offspring, rather than against the more  repellent form that partiality takes in Mr Dombey); also, the fanciful extensions of the well-worn personifications of Time and Care, again expressed through parenthetical elaboration of the syntax.
A different kind of style, and a different kind of rhetoric, is employed in passages where Dickens wants to move us with compassion: notably in Paul's death scene, where he can afford to use simple syntax and vocabulary (expressing the simple images of the child's mind) in the assurance that understatement will merely intensify the reader's sympathy:[4]Paul had never risen from his little bed (1).
He lay there, listening to the noises in the street, quite tranquilly; not caring much how the time went, but watching it and watching everything about him with observing eyes (2).
When the sunbeams struck into his room through the rustling blinds, and quivered on the opposite wall like golden water, he knew that evening was coming on, and that the sky was red and beautiful (3).
As the reflection died away, and a gloom went creeping up the wall, he watched it deepen, deepen, deepen into night (4).
Then he thought how the long streets were dotted with lamps, and how the peaceful stars were shining overhead (5).
His fancy had a strange tendency to wander to the river, which he knew was flowing through the great city; and now he thought how black it was, and how deep it would look, reflecting the hosts of stars — and more than all, how steadily it rolled away to meet the sea (6).
[Dombey and Son, Ch 16]The artlessness of the child's mind is reflected partly in the  repetitions "watching it and watching everything" and "deepen, deepen, deepen" ; in the use of common words, especially those with monosyllabic stems: "he thought how the long streets were dotted with lamps" , "and now he thought how black it was" ; and in the way the cohesion of the passage rests on the subject pronoun he and the conjunction and.
There is a lack of the bold artifice of the preceding passage; and yet it is there in a less noticeable form: in the manner in which throughout the passage constructions are matched in pairs.
Sentences (2) and (3) illustrate the point:(2) He lay there listening to the noises not caring how time went but watching it and watching everything…(3) When the sunbeams struck into his room and quivered on the opposite wall through the rustling blinds like golden water he knew that evening was coming on, and that the sky was red and beautiful.
The pattern of duality is broken, significantly, in two places: at the very beginning, in the poignantly simple opening sentence; and at the very end, where there is the unexpected addition of a third, and longer member to the parallelism of how clauses: and more than all, how steadily it rolled away to meet the sea".
This is a good example of how internal deviation can give prominence (here with an effect of resolving finality) to a.piece of language which carries"special significance.
The sea is both the end-point of the movement from near to far running through the second paragraph, and Dickens's often-iterated symbol of the "great beyond" .
The syntactic coupling, the balancing of one construction against another parallel construction of similar form or similar length, seems to bring to the passage a feeling that all is well: Paul is following the destiny which is ordained for him, and no agonizing will disturb the peace of his passing.
Later in the same chapter, at the point of death, Dickens breaks into a further kind of rhetoric, the declamatory rhetoric he reserves for moments of high drama:[5]The golden ripple on the wall came back again, and nothing else stirred in the room (1).
The old, old fashion!(2) The fashion that came in with our first garments, and will last unchanged until our race has run its course, and the wide firmament is rolled up like a scroll (3).
The old, old fashion — Death!(4) Oh thank GOD, all who see it, for that older fashion yet, of immortality!(5) And look upon us, angels of young children, with regards not quite estranged, when the swift river bears us to the ocean!(6) At such points Dickens has a way of enlarging his theme beyond the narrative pretext, addressing his readers directly as sharers of a common human lot with himself and his characters.
We note his use in (3) of the inclusive first-person pronoun our, and the change from the narrative past tense to the perfective (has run) and the future (will last).
The syntax is that of direct histrionic appeal: disjunctive, verbless sentences, exclamations, apostrophes, and imperatives.
The more schematic rhetoric of passages [3]and [4]is found here too: especially in the parallelisms of sentences (3)"(5) and (6), and in the repetition of the leitmotiv the old, old fashion.
The musical term "leitmotiv" is not inappropriate for the way in which Dickens repeats an idiom or expression, under various modifications and transformations, through episodes of a novel, allowing it to accumulate thematic significance as it goes, an illustration on a small scale of his use of dynamic variation in style.
 "The old, old fashion" and "the older fashion yet" are the culmination of a chain of verbal echoes which begin, in Chapter 8, with the mention of Paul's having "a strange, old-fashioned, thoughtful way" , and which develop from a whimsical sign of his premature aging to a portent of his premature death.
From this high point of religiosity we descend to an ironic concluding sentence, recalling another leitmotiv which makes its first appearance in passage [3]:[6]"Dear me, dear me!
To think, "said Miss Tox, bursting out  afresh that night, as if her heart were broken," that Dombey and Son should be a Daughter after all!
"And directly after this, at the beginning of Chapter 17, there is another abrupt change of tone:[7]Captain Cuttle, in the exercise of that surprising talent for deep-laid and unfathomable scheming, with which (as is not unusual in men of transparent simplicity) he sincerely believed himself to be endowed by nature, had gone to Mr Dombey's house on the eventful Sunday, winking all the way as a vent for his superfluous sagacity, and had presented himself in the full lustre of the ankle-jacks before the eyes of Towlinson (I).
Hearing from that individual, to his great concern, of the impending calamity, Captain Cuttle, in his delicacy, sheered off again confounded; merely handing in the nosegay as a small mark of his solicitude, and leaving his respectful compliments for the family in general, which he accompanied with an expression of his hope that they would lay their heads well to the wind under existing circumstances, and a friendly intimation that he would "look up again" tomorrow(2).
Here is an example of Dickens's mock-elevated style, his comic version of the "Big Bow-wow strain" cultivated by many eighteenth-century and early nineteenth-century authors.
The markers of this style are Latin wordiness and complex syntax: the former especially evident in the frequency of abstract nouns (usually polysyllabic and often accompanied by a polysyllabic adjective), and the latter in the use of relative clauses and -ing participial constructions.
(Abstract nouns, participles, and relative pronouns are italicized in the above passage.)
Grandiloquence was the besetting linguistic vice of Dickens's era, and it is clear from many burlesque treatments of it in his novels (notably in the language of Mr Micawber), that he himself regarded it as a vice.
The occurrence of it in Dickens's own narrative is thus a sure sign of non-seriousness, a linguistic game-playing which is a prose counterpart of the mock-heroic style in poetry.
The burlesque is most apparent where learned words keep company with the homely and seafaring vocabulary associated with the Captain: "in his delicacy, sheered off  again confounded" , "in the full lustre of the ankle-jacks" .
One reaction to this style is that it is merely game-playing, and rather tedious at that.
But the elevation of style functions as a distancing device, especially needful when, as in the passage quoted, Paul's death scene is still fresh in the mind.
Classical polysyllables such as solicitude and calamity keep feelings at bay, so that the reader is led into a frame of mind where the farcical aspects of the good Captain's behaviour can innocently rub shoulders with tragedy.
Dickens varies his style like a virtuoso who can grade and colour the tone of his instrument as the mood requires.
Yet this variation takes place within the encompassing medium of a pervasive Dickensian style.
For example, Dickens is fond of parenthetical constructions which allow the generalizing authorial voice to interrupt the narrative flow.
This trait is not restricted to one variety of style, for we can observe it both in passage [3]( "though (of course) an undeniably fine infant" ; remorseless twins they are for striding through their human forests, notching as they go "); and in passage [7](" as is not unusual in men of transparent simplicity").
Even in Bleak House, where the two narrators — Esther and the impersonal author — are quite distinct, the unifying factors of authorial style are still striking.
One irrepressible Dickensian feature is the farfetched quasisimile, introduced by as if or by some equivalent make-believe construction.
Esther says of Mrs Jellyby: her voice impressed my fancy as if it had a sort of spectacles on too Ch 8 and of Mr Turveydrop:
As he bowed to me in that tight state, I almost believe I saw creases come into the white of his eyes.
[Ch 14]It is with a more elaborate example of this type of fanciful similitude that the impersonal "Dickens" introduces Mrs Rouncewell: She is a fine old lady, handsome, stately, wonderfully neat, and has such a back, and such a stomacher that if her stays should turn out when she dies to have been a broad  old-fashioned family fire-grate, nobody who knows her would have cause to be surprised.
[Ch 7]As a further example, we may observe that the formal rhetoric of parallelism, anaphora, etc is characteristic of Dickens in many of his moods: it is illustrated in passages [3] "[4]" and [5].
This excursion into Dickens's style has indicated that the pervasive approach to style has its proper place, even where style variation attracts the attention more than stylistic consistency.
But it also shows that a writer's verbal art can often be more profitably examined within the narrower scope of a chapter, a page, or even a paragraph, where the stylistic values can be more closely related to their function within a particular context.
This again implies some limitation on the quantitative measurement of style, for within the limited compass of a few hundred words, little statistical significance can be attached to the frequency of this or that feature.
In the following chapter, we shall use relatively short passages for exemplifying the analysis of prose style.
This, it will now be seen, can be justified not only by necessary limitations of space, but by the advantage that can be gained in many respects from sacrificing generality in favour of contextual particularity.
For our purposes, a "text" can happily be defined as a fairly short extract.
2.9 FEATURES OF STYLE
The term "feature" has occurred many times in this chapter.
We define it simply as the occurrence in a text of a linguistic or stylistic category (see 2.1).
Examples of linguistic categories are "nasal consonant" , "noun" , "transitive verb" , "question" , "negative" , "future" , "colour term" .
Examples of stylistic categories are "balanced sentence" , "alliteration" , "personification" .
Stylistic categories are more complex phenomena which are often difficult to define, but which are assumed to be describable in terms of linguistic categories, although they are not a necessary part of the description of a language.
We need to refer to them because they are a significant element of style, but we shall not in general distinguish them formally from linguistic categories.
Linguistic categories are essentially contrastive, and therefore  their occurrence entails the non-occurrence of other categories: for example, the occurrence of a nasal consonant (say /n/) or /m/) entails the non-occurrence of a fricative consonant, a stop consonant, or (more distantly) a vowel.
The contrastive nature of linguistic categories is clear in cases where the category label contains two words: for example a transitive verb obviously contrasts with other types of verb (intransitive verbs, linking verbs, etc).
In cases where there is only one term (eg "noun" ), there is always an omitted generic term: a noun would be explicitly labelled a "noun word" ; a question, a "question sentence" , and so on.
It is part of the function of a linguistic theory, and of its linguistic description of the English language, to specify what linguistic categories there are and what are the contrastive relations between them.
We shall not attempt a detailed account of linguistic categories in this book, but will use as far as possible those which are well enough known not to need explanation in terms of some linguistic theory.
Categories contrast with one another either directly or indirectly: the indirectness of contrast can be shown hierarchically, in terms of a tree diagram.
We shall show this in an uncomplicated way in a diagram which illustrates the classification of words: In terms of this diagram, nouns, for example, contrast directly with adjectives, but only indirectly with prepositions.
Similarly, transitive verbs contrast directly with intransitive verbs, but only indirectly with adjectives.
A word is not a category at all in the sense used: since a text may be decomposed entirely into a sequence of words, there is no linguistic sense in which one could choose to use something else instead of a word.
This is why counting the number of words in a text cannot give any indication of its style.
A word, like a sentence, a letter, and a phoneme, is a UNIT, not a category.
When determining the frequency of a particular feature or category, we work out the number of times it occurs per X, where X is some standard measure.
For example, frequency of nouns can be expressed as a percentage of the number of words in a text: X should normally be a more general, superordinate category including the feature being counted.
It would be rather pointless, for example, to count the number of nouns per sentence, or the number of intransitive verbs per noun: these frequencies would be difficult to interpret, because the result would be affected by independent variables, namely the length of sentences, and the frequency of nouns respectively.
The ideal standard of measurement is provided by the immediately superordinate category: ie, according to Fig 2.2, we should count the number of nouns against major category words, rather than words.
This is because the noun-per-word frequency again involves an independent variable: the frequency of major-category words, as compared with minor-category words.
However, we shall not adhere too pedantically to this principle, since the details of diagrams such as that of Figure 2.2 are matters of disagreement among linguists.
For most purposes, where "a rough indication of frequency" is all that is required, it is often convenient to use the most general term (eg the word unit) as a convenient standard of comparison.
An alternative method, useful in some cases, is to express frequency in terms of the ratio of occurrences of one category to occurrences of another: for example, the ratio of nouns to adjectives.
The most relevant categories to compare in such cases are ones which are immediately in contrast to one another.
Some stylistic features are themselves variable, for example sentence complexity.
A rough but convenient measure of sentence complexity is the average number of words per sentence: that is, we have first to determine the complexity of each sentence by counting the words, and then to derive from this an overall measure of complexity.
If desired, further measurement can be obtained from this; for example, we can measure the dispersion of a frequency distribution of sentence length, and so determine how far complexity tends to vary from one sentence to another.
Other, similar, measures can be made for phonemes per syllable, morphemes per word, etc.
Here we touch on another type of linguistic hierarchy, which interacts with the one already mentioned.
Linguistic units tend to form a hierarchy of extent.
For example, in grammar, sentences are not directly composed of words, but rather sentences are composed of clauses, which in turn are composed of phrases or further (subordinate) clauses, the phrases in turn being composed of words.
Words themselves can be broken down into the minimal grammatical units known as MORPHEMES (stems and affixes).
Complexity of structure can be located at any of these points.
For example, the following two sentences of Ruskin's contain the same number of words, but [8]consists of just one main clause, whereas [9]contains two subordinate clauses (which are italicised):[8]Mountains are the beginning and the end of all natural scenery.
[9]When we build, let us think that we build for ever.
The complexity of [8]lies not in clause structure, but in noun phrase structure (in this case it is the noun phrases that are italicised).
These examples also show how the word-per-sentence measure fails to deal with word complexity:[8]on this level is more complex than [9], which contains no words with more than one morpheme.
Grammatical complexity is in reality not a simple quantitative measure, but a multiplicity of different measures, not only different in terms of hierarchical level, but varying according to the positions and the categories in which complexity is found (see further 7.5).
It is for this reason that averaging words per sentence is a crude and undifferentiated, albeit very convenient measure.
In phonology and grammar, there is a broad area of agreement about linguistic categories and the contrasts into which  they enter, even though different linguistic theories will formalize them in different ways.
In semantics, on the other hand, there is much less agreement.
When we deal with semantic categories, we find that occurrences cut across grammatical categories: for example, the concept of "negation" can include not only the negative particle not, but other word classes such as pronouns (nothing, nobody) and adverbs (nowhere, never), and even items which have no morphological resemblance to these, such as unfinished, impossible, false, hardly.
Even with negation, a fairly well understood category, the limits are difficult to define.
And in other cases, for example if we want to count the occurrence of notions of visual perception, morality, causation, kinship, etc, the boundaries are even more vague.
Contrastiveness is much less clearcut in semantics, and in practice we have to rely on fairly intuitive identification of the category in question.
It is also difficult to hit on an appropriate standard of measurement: it is clear that "past" , "present" and "future" all belong to the category of time reference; but to what higher generic category (say) do moral attributes belong?
Studying the semantic features of texts is inevitably rather an intuitive business, and in so far as we can quantify such features at all, it often seems best to attach them to grammatical labels (eg "colour adjectives" , "adverbials of place" ), and to use some arbitrary standard of measurement, such as number of words.
This discussion has exposed yet another severe problem for quantitative stylistics.
The measurement of frequency depends on the existence of a clearly articulated set of linguistic and stylistic categories.
We may say, in fact, that a stylo-statistician is only as good as the linguistic theory on which he relies.
On the one hand, this is an argument for preferring an analysis of style which has a sound linguistic basis over one which merely uses ad hoc categories.
On the other hand, it leads to the admission that in so far as all linguistic theories are provisional and incomplete (particularly in the sphere of semantics), even the best-informed linguistic analysis leaves a great deal to be desired.
Once again, comfort can be found in the principle of approximation: "a rough indication of frequencies is often just what is needed" .
2.10 STYLE MARKERS AND THE PRINCIPLE OF SELECTION
We have seen in 2.1–3 that any practicable method of stylistic analysis must select some features for analysis and ignore others.
It is clear, in fact, that stylistic analysis must be very selective indeed: some studies concentrate on just one feature, and others on a mere handful of features.
For example, Jan Watt bases his analysis of the first paragraph of Henry James's The Ambassadors on five features:(1) non-transitive verbs;(2) abstract nouns;(3) the word that;(4) elegant variation;(5) delayed specification of referents.
His categories are not well-defined, and yet his essay is an admirable example of how, even with a limited analysis of limited material, it is possible to give an illuminating account of a writer's style.
How are the features for analysis to be selected?
We have assumed that stylistics investigates the relation between the writer's artistic achievement, and how it is achieved through language.
That is, it studies the relation between the significances of a text, and the linguistic characteristics in which they are manifest.
This implies two criteria of relevance for the selection of stylistic features: a literary criterion and a linguistic criterion.
We have suggested that these two criteria converge in the concept of foregrounding (2.3).
By combining literary discrimination and linguistic discrimination in this way, we should become alert to those particular features of style which call for more careful investigation.
Such salient features of style may be called STYLE MARKERS.
The heuristic notion of "style marker" is the key to the method.
If we can identify style markers, we shall rule out, simply by ignoring them, whole areas of the English language which do not seem to be exploited in any unusual way in a particular text.
This is in keeping with a reasonable assumption that even the most ingenious writer will not use every part of the linguistic code for particular artistic purposes.
But of course there is no way of knowing in advance for a particular author or text which parts of the code will be exploited in a stylistically interesting way and which will not.
The reliance on "intuitive observation" in selection means  that a heavy burden falls on the reader's training in the art of alert reading, and of responding to linguistic and other cues.
He may miss out significant features of style which he happens not to have been looking for.
Or he may have an inadequate understanding of how language works and lack a terminology for talking about it.
This is where a linguistic method comes in.
We find it valuable to have a checklist of potential style markers (even though this list itself is necessarily selective) so that a reader may carry out a linguistic survey of the text, searching for significant features.
The checklist is rather like a map which leaves out a lot of detail, but shows what is likely to be most relevant for the traveller.
We present the list in the following chapter and follow it with analyses of three specimen passages of prose.
2.11 CONCLUSION
This chapter has argued that just as the study of style cannot entirely rely on quantitative data, neither can it ultimately do without them.
We have presented five arguments against the view that style can be defined objectively in terms of the frequencies of the linguistic properties of a text or corpus.
(i) There is no purely objective way of determining a statistical norm: as a matter of both convenience and practical necessity we have to rely in general on relative norms.
(ii) There is no complete list of the linguistic properties of a text; therefore, we have to select the features to study.
(iii) There is no direct relation between statistical deviance and stylistic significance: literary considerations must therefore guide us in selecting what features to examine.
(iv) There is no absolute consistency of style with a given domain, and therefore, in measuring the overall statistical properties of texts, we may fail to capture significant variations of style.
(v) There is no agreement on the set of descriptive categories required for an adequate account of a language such as English; consequently different investigators are likely to differ in the way they identify linguistic features in a text.
Together, these arguments may seem to leave very little foothold for quantitative methods in the study of literary style.
But on the other side there still remains the basic fact that without quantitative confirmation, statements on style lack the support of concrete evidence.
Thus, although we are wary of claiming too much for statistical analysis, we would regard it as an essential and important tool in stylistic description.
In the next chapter, we aim to demonstrate, on a limited scale, how frequency counts can be an important aid in practical analyses.
A method of analysis and some examples
This chapter has the practical purpose of showing how the apparatus of linguistic description can be used in analysing the style of a prose text.
We take for granted the principles that have been argued in Chapters 1 and 2.
We also take for granted a set of linguistic categories which will be more or less common knowledge to those who have a basic familiarity with the workings of the English language, whether in literary or non-literary contexts.
One particular area in which technical terms are likely to cause some problems is that of grammar: and here we shall follow the terminology and general view of grammar presented in Quirk and Greenbaum's University Grammar of English."
Another area is that of foregrounding, where we draw on the terminology of traditional poetics ( "metaphor" , "metonymy" , onomatopoeia", etc).
Although many of these terms are widely current in literary scholarship, we shall presuppose a linguistic account of these phenomena, and for this purpose, it is convenient to refer the reader to Leech, A Linguistic Guide to English Poetry., Following the list of categories in 3. 1, explanations of selected points will be added in 3.2.
Every analysis of style, in our terms, is an attempt to find the artistic principles underlying a writer's choice of language.
All writers, and for that matter, all texts, have their individual qualities.
Therefore the features which recommend themselves to the attention in one text will not necessarily be important in another text by the same or a different author.
There is no infallible technique for selecting what is significant.
We have to  make ourselves newly aware, for each text, of the artistic effect of the whole, and the way linguistic details lit into this whole.
Nevertheless it is useful to have a checklist of features which may or may not be significant in a given text.
For this reason, the following list of questions has been prepared.
The answers to these questions will give a range of data which may be examined in relation to the literary effect of each passage.
We stress that the list serves a heuristic purpose: it enables us to collect data on a fairly systematic basis.
It is not exhaustive, of course, but is rather a list of "good bets" : categories which in our experience, are likely to yield stylistically relevant information.
The stylistic values associated with the linguistic data must be largely taken on trust at present; in subsequent chapters, we shall endeavour to show how these values, too, can be studied systematically.
3.1 A CHECKLIST OF LINGUISTIC AND STYLISTlC CATEGORIES
The categories are placed under four general headings: lexical categories, grammatical categories, figures of speech, and cohesion and context.
Semantic categories are not listed separately, since, as suggested in 2.9, it is easier to arrive at these through other categories; we shall, for example, use our lexical categories to find out how choice of words involves various types of meaning.
Since the purpose of the list is heuristic, there is no harm in "mixing categories" in this way.
It is also in the nature of things that categories will overlap, so that the same feature may well be noted under different headings.
A:Lexical categories
[For notes (i-xiv) on the categories see pp 80–2]
1 GENERAL.
Is the vocabulary simple or complex? formal or colloquial? descriptive or evaluative? general or specific?
How far does the writer make use of the emotive and other associations of words, as opposed to their referential meaning?
Does the text contain idiomatic phrases and if so, with what kind  of dialect or register are these idioms associated?
Is there any use of rare or specialized vocabulary?
Are any particular morphological categories noteworthy (eg compound words, words with particular suffixes)?
To what semantic fields do words belong?
2 NOUNS.
Are the nouns abstract or concrete?
What kinds of abstract nouns occur (eg nouns referring to events, perceptions, processes, moral qualities, social qualities)?
What use is made of proper names? collective nouns?
3 ADJECTIVES. adjectives frequent?
To what kinds of attribute do adjectives refer? physical? psychological? visual? auditory? colour? referential? emotive? evaluative? etc.
Are adjectives restrictive or non-restrictive? gradable or non-gradable? attributive or predicative?
4 VERBS.
Do the verbs carry an important part of the meaning?
Are they stative (referring to states) or dynamic (referring to actions, events, etc)?
Do they "refer" to movements, physical acts, speech acts, psychological states or activities, perceptions, etc?
Are they transitive, intransitive, linking (intensive), etc?
Are they factive or non-factive?
5 ADVERBS.
Are adverbs frequent?
What semantic functions do they perform (manner, place, direction, time, degree, etc)?
Is there any significant use of sentence adverbs (conjuncts such as so, therefore, however; disjuncts such as certainly, obviously, frankly)?
B: Grammatical categories
1 SENTENCE TYPES.
Does the author use only statements (declarative sentences), or does he also use questions, commands, exclamations, or minor sentence types (such as sentences with no verb)?
If these other types are used, what is their function?
2 SENTENCE COMPLEXITY.
Do sentences on the whole have a simple or a complex structure?
What is the average sentence  length (in number of words)?
What is the ratio of dependent to independent clauses?
Does complexity vary strikingly from one sentence to another?
Is complexity mainly due to(i) coordination,(ii) subordination,(iii) parataxis juxtaposition of clauses or other equivalent structures)?
In what parts of a sentence does complexity tend to occur?
For instance, is there any notable occurrence of anticipatory structure (eg of complex subjects preceding the verbs, of dependent clauses preceding the subject of a main clause)?
3 CLAUSE TYPES.
What types of dependent clause are favoured:relative clauses, adverbial clauses, different types of nominal clauses (that-clauses, wh-clauses, etc)?
Are reduced or non-finite clauses commonly used, and if so, of what type are they (infinitive clauses, -ing clauses, -ed clauses, verbless clauses)?
4 CLAUSE STRUCTURE.
Is there anything significant about clause elements (eg frequency of objects, complements, adverbials; of transitive or intransitive verb constructions)?
Are there any unusual orderings (initial adverbials, fronting of object or complement, etc)?
Do special kinds of clause construction occur (such as those with preparatory it or there)?
5 NOUN PHRASES.
Are they relatively simple or complex?
Where does the complexity lie (in premodification by adjectives, nouns, etc, or in postmodification by prepositional phrases, relative clauses, etc)?
Note occurrence of listings (eg sequences of adjectives), coordination, or apposition.
6 VERB PHRASES.
Are there any significant departures from the use of the simple past tense?
For example, notice occurrences and functions of the present tense; of the progressive aspect (eg was lying); of the perfective aspect (eg has/had appeared); of modal auxiliaries (eg can, must, would, etc).
7 OTHER PHRASE TYPES.
Is there anything to be said about other phrase types: prepositional phrases, adverb phrases, adjective phrases?
8 WORD CLASSES.
Having already considered major or lexical  word classes, we may here consider minor word classes ( "function words" ): prepositions, conjunctions, pronouns, determiners, auxiliaries, interjections.
Are particular words of these types used for particular effect (eg the definite or indefinite article; first person pronouns I, we, etc; demonstratives such as this and that; negative words such as not, nothing, no)
9 GENERAL.
Note here whether any general types of grammatical construction are used to special effect; eg comparative or superlative constructions; coordinative or listing constructions; parenthetical constructions; appended or interpolated structures such as occur in casual speech.
Do lists and coordinations (eg lists of nouns) tend to occur with two, three or more than three members?
C:Figures of speech, etc
Here we consider the incidence of features which are fore-grounded (1.4) by virtue of departing in some way from general norms of communication by means of the language code; for example, exploitation of regularities of formal patterning, or of deviations from the linguistic code.
For identifying such features, the traditional figures of speech (schemes and tropes) are often useful categories.
1 GRAMMATICAL AND LEXICAL SCHEMES.
Are there any cases of formal and structural repetition (anaphora, parallelism, etc) or of mirror-image patterns (chiasmus)?
Is the rhetorical effect of these one of antithesis, reinforcement, climax, anticlimax, etc (X?
2 PHONOLOGICAL SCHEMES.
Are there any phonological patterns of rhyme, alliteration, assonance, etc?
Are there any salient rhythmical patterns?
Do vowel and consonant sounds pattern or cluster in particular ways?
How do these phonological features interact with meaning?
3 TROPES.
Are there any obvious violations of or departures from the linguistic code?
For example, are there any neologisms  (such as Americanly)? deviant lexical collocations (such as portentous infants)? semantic, syntactic, phonological, or graphological deviations?
Such deviations will often be the clue to special interpretations associated with traditional figures of speech such as metaphor, metonymy, synecdoche, paradox, irony If such tropes occur, what kind of special interpretation is involved (eg metaphor can be classified as personifying, animizing, concretizing, synaesthetic, etc)?
Because of its close connection with metaphor, simile may also be considered here.
Does the text contain any similes, or similar constructions (eg"as if constructions)?
What dissimilar semantic fields are related through simile?
D:Context and cohesion
Finally, we take a preliminary look at features which will be more fully dealt with in Chapters 7 to I0.
Under COHESION ways in which one part of a text is linked to another are considered: for example, the ways in which sentences are connected.
This is the internal organization of the text.
Under CONTEXT (see the discussion of discourse situation, 8.1) we consider the external relations of a text or a part of a text, seeing it as a discourse presupposing a social relation between its participants (author and reader; character and character, etc), and a sharing by participants of knowledge and assumptions.
1 COHESION Does the text contain logical or other links between sentences (eg coordinating conjunctions, or linking adverbials)?
Or does it tend to rely on implicit connections of meaning?
What sort of use is made of cross-reference by pronouns (she, it, they, etc)? by substitute forms (do, so, etc), or ellipsis?
Alternatively, is any use made of elegant variation — the avoidance of repetition by the substitution of a descriptive phrase (as, for example, "the old lawyer" or "her uncle" may substitute for the repetition of an earlier "Mr Jones" )?
Are meaning connections reinforced by repetition of words and phrases, or by repeatedly using words from the same semantic field?
2 CONTEXT.
Does the writer address the reader directly, or through the words or thoughts of some fictional character?
What linguistic clues (eg first-person pronouns I, me, my, mine) are there of the addresser-addressee relationship?
What attitude does the author imply towards his subject?
If a character's words or thoughts are represented, is this done by direct quotation (direct speech), or b some other method (eg indirect speech, free indirect speech)?
Are there significant changes of style according to who is supposedly speaking or thinking the words on the page?
3.2 NOTES ON THE CATEGORIES
(i) In a formal sense, word complexity should be measured by counting morphemes.
For example, un-friend-li-ness contains four morphemes, and war only one.
But determining the number of morphemes in a word can be a problem, especially with words of foreign or classical origin, such as signification.
For this reason, counting the number of syllables per word is a more convenient measure of complexity.
Morphemic complexity and syllabic complexity are in gross terms reasonably equivalent; but they are not necessarily equivalent for individual words; for example, six-th-s contains three morphemes, but only one syllable; establish, on the other hand, contains only one morpheme, but three syllables. (ii) An idiom may be roughly defined as a sequence of two or more words, the meaning of which is not predictable from the meanings of the constituent words; eg get by, as it were , under the weather.
(iii) REGISTER is the term commonly used for language variation of a non-dialectal type; eg differences between polite and familiar language; spoken and written language; scientific, religious, legal language, etc. (iv) On the classification of verbs in terms of their relation to other elements in the clause, see Quirk and Greenbaum (1973) 7.117 and Chapter 12.
This aspect of lexical  choice is closely bound up with semantic relations between noun phrases in the clause: these have been investigated by Fillmore under the heading of "case" , and by Halliday under the heading of "transitivity" .
Their role in style is discussed in 6.1.
Factive verbs presuppose the truth of what is being asserted (eg "Mary liked the show" ).
Counterfactives presuppose the negation of what is asserted (eg "Mary pretended to like the show" ) and non-factives leave the question of truth open (eg "I believe that Mary liked the show" ).
(v) The traditional classification of adverbs and adverbials into adverbs of time, place, manner, frequency, etc is serviceable enough; a more thorough and systematic classification of adverbs is given in Quirk and Greenbaum ( "973) Chs 5 and 7, where a major distinction is made between adjuncts, disjuncts, and conjuncts. (vi) The delaying of the main" information point"of a sentence by anticipatory and parenthetic structure is discussed further in 7.5.
This is the defining feature of the traditional rhetorical category of "periodic" sentence, often contrasted with the "loose" sentence.
(vii) We follow current grammatical theory and practice in treating as clauses what are traditionally called participial, gerund, and infinitive constructions; for example "Eating people is wrong" , "a woman destined for greatness" , "I'm sorry to hear it" .
These are all regarded as non-finite clauses (see Quirk and Greenbaum (1973) especially 11.2–4).
(viii) See Note (iv) above, and Quirk and Greenbaum (1973) 7. "17" on clause elements.
(ix) Of course, the same word form may occur in more than one word class.
For example, that is a determiner (specifically, a demonstrative determiner) in "That day nothing happened" , a pronoun in "I know that" , and a conjunction in "I know that he's wrong" .
In English, the overlap between the pronoun and determiner classes, for instance, is very striking.
(See Quirk and Greenbaum (1973) 4.5–15, 4.78–97.)(x) A linguistic reinterpretation of the traditional distinction between schemes and tropes is given in Leech (1969) 5. 1  Schemes are defined as "foregrounded repetitions of expression" , and tropes as "foregrounded irregularities of content" .
Various kinds of scheme, corresponding to traditional figures of speech such as "anaphora" and "antithesis" are discussed in Leech (1969), Chs 4 and 5. (xi) The auditory aspect of prose writing should not be neglected, and forms part of the larger topic of iconicity or mimesis in language (see 7.7).
For an introductory classification and discussion of auditory effects in poetry, see Leech(1969)Ch6. (xii) Once again, reference may conveniently be made to the treatment of these figures of speech (paradox, metaphor, irony, etc) in Leech (1969) Chs 8–10. (xiii) Some aspects of cohesion are discussed and illustrated in 7.8.
Sentence connection is treated in Quirk and Greenbaum (1973) Ch I0.
For a more extended analysis of cohesion in English, see Halliday and Hasan (1975).
(xiv) The topic of speech and thought presentation is developed in Chapter 10.
3.3 JOSEPH CONRAD: EXAMPLE 1
In the remainder of this chapter we shall apply the categories in 3.1 selectively to three texts which are comparable both in length and in that each of them is the opening passage of a short story.
Our three authors are Conrad, Lawrence, and James.
The procedure in each case will be to begin with some general first impression of the passage; and then to make selective use of the checklist in order to bring to the attention what appear to be the most significant style markers of each.
These style markers, in turn, will be related to other style markers within the context of the passage's literary function.
In the final section (3.7), we give a table of quantitative data from these three passages, so that our analysis can be seen to be based on "hard evidence" .
Cross-references to this appendix are given by italic numbers,(eg 16) From Joseph Conrad, The Secret Sharer On my right hand there were lines of fishing-stakes  resembling a mysterious system of half-submerged bamboo fences, incomprehensible in its division of the domain of tropical fishes, and crazy of aspect as if abandoned forever by some nomad tribe of fishermen now gone to the other end of the ocean; for there was no sign of human habitation as far as the eye could reach (1).
To the left a group of barren islets, suggesting ruins of stone walls, towers and block houses, had its foundations set in a blue sea that itself looked solid, so still and stable did it lie below my feet; even the track of light from the westering sun shone smoothly, without that animated glitter which tells of an imperceptible ripple (2).
And when I turned my head to take a parting glance at the tug which had just left us anchored outside the bar, I saw the straight line of the flat shore joined to the stable sea, edge to edge, with a perfect and unmarked closeness, in one levelled floor half brown, half blue under the enormous dome of the sky (3).
Corresponding in their insignificance to the islets of the sea, two small clumps of trees, one on each side of the only fault in the impeccable joint, marked the mouth of the river Meinam we had just left on the first preparatory stage of our homeward journey; and, far back on the inland level, a larger and loftier mass, the grove surrounding the great Paknam pagoda, was the only thing on which the eye could rest from the vain task of exploring the monotonous sweep of the horizon (4).
Here and there gleams as of a few scattered pieces of silver marked the windings of the great river; and on the nearest of them, just within the bar, the tug steaming right into the land became lost to my sight, hull and funnel and masts, as though the impassive earth had swallowed her up without an effort, without a tremor (5).
My eye followed the light cloud of her smoke, now here, now there, above the plain, according to the devious curves of the stream, but always fainter and farther away, till I lost it at last behind the mitre-shaped hill of the great pagoda (6).
And then I was left alone with my ship, anchored at the head of the Gulf of Siam(7).
Our first impression of this passage is of a meticulously detailed setting of the scene for the story.
The description is clearly etched, so that we can reconstruct, in our mind's eye, the whole topography.
But more than this, we have a vivid sense of the loneliness of the human observer, set apart from his surroundings, and of "a mind energetically stretching to subdue a dazzling experience outside the self in a way that has innumerable counterparts elsewhere in Conrad" .
A:Lexical features
Nouns
As a physical description, we expect the passage to contain a large number of physical, concrete nouns (stakes, bamboo, fences, fishermen, ruins, etc) but what is more striking is that these concrete nouns are matched by nouns which are more abstract in one way or another.
Significantly, these tend to occur as heads of major noun phrases ( "lines of…stakes" , "system of…fences" ), so that concreteness is subordinated to abstraction (20, 21).
First, we may notice that almost half the concrete nouns refer to general topographical features which, as it were, divide the field of vision into geographical areas and points of focus: domain, ocean, islets, sea, shore, sky, river, earth, cloud, guy, etc.
Also contributing to the effect are what may be called "abstract locative" nouns, indicating geometrical features: lines, division, end, track, head, line, edge, joint, sweep, curves, etc.
All these nouns refer to objects of vision: the other senses are excluded.
Perhaps this is one reason why the observer seems to stand apart from the scene he experiences.
General
Other comments on lexis cut across word class divisions.
It is important to note that we are given not simply a description of a scene, but an account of the relation between the visual world and its observer, who strives to comprehend and interpret it.
This relational emphasis is found in the repetition of the word eye itself in abstract nouns implying perception (aspect, sign, glitter, ripple, glance, etc), and in verbs like see, mark, and look.
The passage is concerned not only with objects of perception, but with the process of perceiving them; the occurrence of first person pronouns (over half of the personal pronouns are of  this type) is a symptom of this(37)
On the other hand, Conrad avoids using verbs with a human agent.
The "eye" , as if with a will of its own, becomes the subject-agent in "as far as the eye could reach" (1), "My eye followed the light cloud" (6),"the only thing on which the eye could rest (4).
The only example of an agentive verb with a human subject is "I turned my head" (3).
Other verbs which could involve agency are deprived of their active meaning by being used in the passive participle form: abandoned, anchored (55); whereas stative verbs are quite frequent: resembling, looked, lie, shone, marked, etc (22).
The general feeling is that the narrator, although acutely alive to his environment, is detached and powerless in the face of its immensity.
Another, related, tendency is in the occurrence of adjectives which express strangeness or lack of definition, often by the use of negatives: half-submerged, mysterious, incomprehensible, unmarked, devious.
To these may be added other negative expressions such as insignificance, no sign, without a tremor.
Other adjectives, such as still, monotonous, stable, also have a negative element of meaning ( "not moving" , "not varied" , "not easily moved" ) stressing the uncanny featurelessness of the scene.
These contrast with a few words which suggest a faint potential disturbance of the underlying calmness: animated, glitter, gleams, ripple.
There is a congruity between the eye to which things are "imperceptible" and the mind to which things are "incomprehensible" .
B:Grammatical features
Sentence length
It is perhaps significant, in this opening paragraph, that the sentences move to a peak of length in sentence (4), and thence slope down to the final brevity of (7).
(The progression of sentence lengths in words is: 66 — 59 — 61 — 88 — 61 — 44 — 18.)
The effect of placing the short sentence at the end is powerful: whereas other sentences relate the setting to the observer, this one relates the observer to his setting, and thereby summarizes what has been implied in the rest of the paragraph.
Since this sentence explains the context for what precedes, we might think it more natural to place it (deprived of the connecting  words "And then" ) at the beginning of the paragraph.
But in that case the expression "I was alone" would have been banal: it is only after we have felt the isolation of the speaker in all its particularity, and have seen the last vestige of human life disappear over the horizon, that we can understand the force of the simple statement.
Sentence structure
Sentences (1) -(6) are all quite complex, and have a certain similarity of structure.
All except (6) have an introductory adverbial clause or phrase providing a point of orientation before we launch into a main clause.
From here, each sentence is elaborated by coordination and subordination — by progressive elaboration of "trailing constituents" (see 7.5.3–4), as if to imitate the movement from the observer's eye towards the distance.
Sentence (1) illustrates this characteristic "reaching out" effect.
 "On my right hand" establishes the observer as the point of reference.
This sentence structure then develops as set out in Fig 3. 1.
Fig 3.1 shows six degrees of subordination (A-F), each representing, as it were, a further step away from the starting point towards the remotest horizon, and even beyond (for the observer's imagination takes him "to the other end of the ocean" ).
Accompanying this progressive distancing, there is a distancing from graspable reality, an increasing emphasis on what cannot be known or explained: "resembling mysterious incomprehensible crazy of aspect as if abandoned no sign…" .
Other sentences have a similar type of structure, and tend to end in a similar evocation of vastness and remoteness, as the eye reaches its limit of vision: "under the enormous dome of the sky" ; "the monotonous sweep of the horizon" ; "as if the impassive earth had swallowed her up without an effort, without a tremor" ; "till I lost it at last behind the mitre-shaped hill of the great pagoda" .
Prepositions
The passage has an unusually large number of prepositions (9), particularly prepositions of place and direction, such as on and to, and the preposition of(40).
In fact, a large part of the syntactic complexity of the sentence comes from the use of prepositional phrases.
The role of of in particular, is to relate two  noun-expressions together, and the former of these expressions is always an abstract noun — if we include as "abstract" geometrical and topographical nouns like "the straight line of the flat shore" , "the devious curves of the stream" — and collective nouns such as  "a group of barren islets" , "two small clumps of trees" .
What this suggests is that perception and cognition go hand in hand (as indeed they do in modern psychological theories): the eye does not passively record objects in the raw, but structures and schematizes them in cognitively coded groupings.
For Conrad, this is as it should be: that see means both to perceive and to comprehend is more than an accident of metaphor.
In his struggle with the alien and threatening"beyondness a man must faithfully use his full sensibility, in which his senses and his understanding are indissolubly joined.
C:Figures of speech etc
Quasi-simile
Although Conrad does not use conventional similes of the kind "X is like Y" , he uses a range of constructions which express or imply similitude: "resembling some mysterious system…" (1), as if abandoned for ever.
(1), "suggesting ruins of stone walls (2)," looked solid (2), "Corresponding in their insignificance" (4), "as of a few scattered pieces of silver (5), as though the impassive earth had swallowed her up…" (5), "mitre-shaped" (6).
Unlike orthodox similes, a number of these constructions suggest an "explanation" which we know is not true.
These, coupled with the element of mystery and unfathomability, strengthen the impression of a mind stretched to explore and understand.
Again, the eye's exploration of the panorama is not inert, but active and imaginative: "looking at" something means grasping what it "looks like" .
Metaphor
This analogizing faculty is also revealed through metaphor.
The feeling that the vista, for all its peacefulness, is disquieting, comes to us partly through two diverse types of metaphor: the "civilizing" metaphor which allows islands (already compared to man-made buildings) to have foundations (2), the sea to be stable (3), the sea and land to constitute a floor (3), and the sky a  dome (3).
Such metaphors indicate an unreal calm, because they render the immensities of nature in terms of things which are familiar, solid, and manmade.
In contrast, other metaphors make reference to an animacy which seems to threaten by its very absence.
Except for that of the tug being "swallowed up" , these metaphors are expressed through modifying adjectives.
They are therefore subdued, and scarcely noticeable to a casual reader: the "animated glitter" (2), the "impassive earth" (5), the "devious curves" (6)(the fact that the earth is impassive, or devoid of feeling, suggests that it has capabilities in that direction).
These small hints of life give an uneasy impression that what is apparently so lifeless may have undisclosed resources of power and activity.
Other metaphors are associated with the observer's eye: unlike the observer himself his eye behaves like an independent agent: it "reaches" (1), it seeks "rest" from the "vain task of exploring" (4), and it "follows" the cloud of smoke of the tug (6).
Although the metaphor whereby perception is equated with movement towards the object perceived is commonplace, the effect of making the eye, rather than the observer himself the subject of these verbs is to disassociate the observer, as if in contemplative detachment, from the eye, which is restless and energetic.
We sense the alienation of the man who experiences his surroundings without participation: even his observations seem to come from some extrinsic impulse.
Schemes
The passage somehow communicates its visual experience not only with intense realization, but with a sense of wonder.
This comes in part from patterns which have an emotively reinforcing effect, particularly pairings of like-sounding words and phrases: "larger and loftier" (4), "without an effort, without a tremor (5)," fainter and farther"(6).
Rhythmic parallelism accompanies the parallelism of grammar.
These couplings stress the dominant dimensions of the experience: immensity, stillness, distance.
Occasionally consonant and vowel repetitions are employed in a bay which lends force to semantic connections: "solid, so still and stable" (2), "sun shone smoothly" (2).
There is onomatopoeia in the alliteration, assonance, and quickening rhythm of "animated glitter" (/x x x /x) and  imperceptible ripple"(x x /x x /x).
The speeding-up effect is caused partly by the number of unstressed syllables, partly by short vowels, and partly by the brevity of the stop consonants /p/ and /t/.
We may contrast these with the broadening, expansive effect of the long vowels and monosyllables in "enormous dome of the sky" (3).
These are not gratuitous embellishments: they integrate into the sound texture of the language the extremes of infinite space and microscopic detail between which the description so remarkably ranges.
D:Cohesion and context
Cohesion
The passage does not make conspicuous use of logical and referential links between sentences: for example, there are no cross-referring demonstratives or linking adverbials, and few third-person pronouns 38).
The definite article is sometimes a mark of coreference: for instance, "the islets of the sea" (4) refers back to "a group of barren islets" (2) and "the great river" (5) refers back to "the river Meinam" (4).
But continuity between the parts of the description depends largely on the observer, whose vantage point is the pivot around which the cycloramic picture unfolds.
Thus most sentences begin with a reference, actual or implied, to the first-person narrator: "On my right hand…" (1), "To the left…" (2), "And when I turned my h.a…(3)," My eye followed… "(6)," And then I was left alone…"(7).
Through this progression, we build up a vista in the round, the lone figure of the narrator at its centre; then, in (4) and (5), the eye focuses on a particular point: the distant river and vanishing tug, whose disappearance from the scene reinforces the narrator's isolation.
In the final sentence our attention is abruptly brought back from the remote horizon to the observer himself.
3.4 D. H. LAWRENCE: EXAMPLE II
At the beginning of Odour of Chrysanthemums, Lawrence's general plan is similar to that of Conrad in The Secret Sharer: he presents a setting, following a path of unfolding detail until the scene is evoked in all its particularity, and then moves our attention to focus on the predicament of humanity within that  setting.
In both cases, humanity — however dissimilar may be the lot of the lonely sea captain from that of the woman who comes "stooping out of the…fowl-house" — seems dwarfed and overwhelmed by the environment.
But in other respects these descriptions are strikingly different.
From D. H. Lawrence, Odour of Chrysanthemums The small locomotive engine, Number 4, came clanking, stumbling down from Selston with seven full waggons (1).
It appeared round the corner with loud threats of speed, but the colt that it startled from among the gorse, which still flickered indistinctly in the raw afternoon, outdistanced it at a canter (2).
A woman, walking up the railway line to Underwood, drew back into the hedge, held her basket aside, and watched the footplate of the engine advancing (3).
The trucks thumped heavily past, one by one, with slow inevitable movement, as she stood insignificantly trapped between the jolting black waggons and the hedge; then they curved away towards the coppice where the withered oak leaves dropped noiselessly, while the birds, pulling at the scarlet hips beside the track, made off into the dusk that had already crept into the spinney (4).
In the open, the smoke from the engine sank and cleaved to the rough grass (5).
The fields were dreary and forsaken, and in the marshy strip that led to the whimsey, a reedy pit-pond, the fowls had already abandoned their run among the alders, to roost in the tarred fowl-house (6).
The pit-bank loomed up beyond the pond, flames like red sores licking its ashy sides, in the afternoon's stagnant light (7).
Just beyond rose the tapering chimneys and the clumsy black headstocks of Brinsley Colliery (8).
The two wheels were spinning fast up against the sky, and the winding-engine rapped out its little spasms (9).
The miners were being turned up (10).
The engine whistled as it came into the wide bay of railway lines beside the colliery, where rows of trucks stood in harbour (11).
Miners, single, trailing and in groups, passed like shadows diverging home (12).
At the edge of the ribbed level of sidings squat a low cottage, three steps down from the cinder track (13).
A large bony vine clutched at the house, as if to  claw down the tiled roof (14).
Round the bricked yard grew a few wintry primroses (15).
Beyond, the long garden sloped down to a bush-covered brook course (16).
There were some twiggy apple trees, winter-crack trees, and ragged cabbages (17).
Beside the path hung dishevelled pink chrysanthemums, like pink cloths hung on bushes (18).
A woman came stooping out of the felt-covered fowl-house, half-way down the garden (19).
A:Lexical features
Nouns
In comparison with the Conrad passage, purely concrete nouns (engine, wagons, colt, gorse, railway, hedge, basket, etc) are here more frequent, and indeed account for more than two-thirds of all nouns.
The description is direct and concrete, rather than being abstracted and intellectualized through the act of perception.
Abstract nouns, when they occur, often refer to movement and action: threats, speed, canter, movement, winding, spasms (20).
Verbs
Verbs are far more frequent in this passage (5).
Most verbs are dynamic, and many indicate movement: came, clanking, flickered, licking, trailing, claw, grew, etc (24).
Even static elements of the landscape have implications of movement: the pit bank "looms up" , the chimneys "taper" , the vine "clutches" .
Verbs which are stative generally have implications of movement, indicating physical position or posture: held, stood, cleaved, squat, hung, etc.
Auditory verbs are used for mechanical activities: clanking, thumped, rapped, whistled.
The number of intransitive verbs is very striking (28).
Since intransitive verbs do not specify, as transitive verbs usually do, a cause-effect relationship, the impression we get is that movement is divorced from purpose: all the strident activity of the industrial scene seems to be self-generating and uncontrolled.
Adjectives
To accompany the auditory imagery of verbs, the adjectives bring visual imagery, particularly of colour (10): red, scarlet, and pink contrast vividly with black, tarred, and ashy, bringing into  relief small signs of light or life against the drab and blighted background.
Another notable grouping of adjectives, this time morphologically defined, consists of adjectives ending in -y: marshy, reedy, ashy, dreary, clumsy, wintry, twiggy.
Such adjectives belong to the popular, rather than learned, stratum of English vocabulary and tend to have emotive connotations, here largely pejorative.
They tie in with the large number of adjectives which emphasize ugliness and torpor: raw, rough, ragged, forsaken, stagnant, dishevelled, etc.
Adjectives underline the theme of lifelessness: wintry, bony, ashy and stagnant all connote death in their various spheres of meaning.
Adverbs
The largest group of adverbs is that of place, and especially direction 32): down, back, aside, away, up, behind.
These tend to combine with verbs to emphasize movement and activity ( "stumbling down" , "walking up" , "drew back" , etc).
There are also four manner adverbs in -ly: indistinctly, heavily, insignificantly, and noiselessly.
Other adverbs, especially still and already, refer to time, emphasizing the premature nightfall, which, with its increase of gloom, colours the passage with despondency.
General
In comparison with Conrad, Lawrence uses relatively simple, homely, common-core Anglo-Saxon vocabulary.
Rare words like whimsey and winter-crack do occur, but they are of the kind one may suppose to have local dialect currency.
In this respect, they may be linked with other "local" words like coppice and spinney.
In addition, Lawrence exploits emotive associations, not only in his choice of words, but in the way he combines them.
In juxtapositions such as large bony vine, clumsy black headstocks, dishevelled pink chrysanthemums, the associations of adjectives seem to interact, so that, for example , pink is given a tawdry overtone by its neighbour dishevelled.
B:Grammatical features
Sentence complexity
The average sentence lengths of the two passages are  fifty-seven words for Conrad, and only twenty for Lawrence &); in Conrad the ratio of independent clauses to dependent clauses is 1:2.8, and in Lawrence 1:1 (46) Lawrence, then uses much simpler sentences than Conrad, especially in his third paragraph.
Much of what complexity there is occurs in the adverbials specifying place, direction, etc (32, 40, 63), and in the noun phrases, descriptively loaded with pre-modifying adjectives (57).
(Contrast Conrad's heavily post-modified noun phrases.)
We may note an almost obligatory use of adjective modifiers in the third paragraph: "Round the bricked yard grew a few wintry primroses.
Beyond, the long garden sloped down to a bush-covered brook course.
There were some twiggy apple trees, winter-crack trees, and ragged cabbages."
At the end of the first paragraph, the sudden brevity of the sentence "The miners were being turned up" has an effect comparable to that of Conrad's final sentence.
The sentence summarizes and interprets a setting which up to now we have seen more or less as detached onlookers: by using the language which the locals themselves might use ( "being turned up" ), it invites us to become humanly involved, to see ourselves as insiders.
Word classes
It is noteworthy that major word classes ( "content words" ) account for a high percentage of the total number of words (58 per cent, as compared with 52 per cent in the Conrad passage, and 47 per cent in the James passage).
For example, Lawrence makes little use of pronouns, conjunctions, and auxiliaries; and whereas the preposition of occurs twenty-nine times (out of 397 words in all) in the Conrad passage, it occurs only seven times (out of 377 words) in this one.
Perhaps these are symptoms of the greater concreteness of Lawrence's description: he makes his nouns, adjectives, verbs and adverbs work for him without weaving them into an abstract web of relationships.
Thus where Conrad talks of "a clump of trees" , separating the shape from the substance, Lawrence simply talks of "coppices" and "spinneys" ; where Conrad refers to a "tribe of fishermen" , Lawrence is content to refer to "miners" .
This is undoubtedly one of the factors that make Lawrence's style seem easier and more accessible than Conrad's.
C:Figures of speech etc
Schemes
Lawrence does not neglect sound effects in impressing on us the harsh sensory qualities of the industrial scene.
He makes use of verbs which are intrinsically onomatopoeic, like clanking, thumped and rapped, as well as words which are phonaesthetic in a less direct sense, such as stumbling and clumsy, clutch and claw, in which the similarities of sound connote similarities of meaning In the description of the train, regularities of rhythm (clanking, stumbling down from Selston "," one by one, with slow inevitable movement) are interspersed with the clogging effect of juxtaposed heavily stressed syllables (loud threats of speed "," The trucks thumped heavily past "), to which consonant clusters add vehement emphasis: Elsewhere, the short vowel /æ/; combines with repeated stop consonants to intensify hard, uncompromising features of the landscape: " jolting black waggons "," black headstocks "," rapped out its spasms".
 "twiggy apple trees" , "ragged cabbages" .
Metaphor and simile
Metaphor and simile serve to animate and humanize what is inanimate: the engine "stumbles" , the headstocks are "clumsy" , the winding engine has "spasms" , the cottage "squats" .
The humanoid vigour of man-made things, as suggested by these metaphors, is at the same time ungainly and unnatural.
It is also charged, like the "looming" pit bank, with menace: "loud threats of speed" , "flames like red sores licking its ashy sides" .
In the third paragraph, these same qualities are transferred to nature, as if it has been contaminated: the "bony vine"  "claws and clutches" at the house.
At the same time, nature is given the lifeless and blighted quality of man's world: "ragged cabbages" and "dishevelled chrysanthemums" are odd collocations because ragged normally applies to clothes, and dishevelled to hair.
Actions are as if self-initiated by inanimates: this is seen in the large number of inanimate subjects of verbs of motion and activity.
Industry seems to have become a driving force of strident activity, against which background human beings, the miners, are "like shadows" .
The dominant effects of the  animation of the lifeless, and the dehumanization of man, combine with the more obvious symbolism of the woman "insignificant ly trapped" by the train, and the woman "stooping out of" the fowl house.
D:Cohesion and context
Lexical repetition
Perhaps the most notable feature of cohesion in the passage is lexical repetition of various kinds (65).
Typically, Lawrence makes use of the reinforcing effect of repetition in cases like "pink chrysanthemums like pink cloths" (18).
Definite article
We have noticed that Lawrence uses few pronouns, and to some extent the definite article may be seen as an alternative device of cross-reference, less ambiguous, because it is accompanied by a noun identifying a previous reference.
Thus "the engine" in (3),(5) and (11) refers back to the engine introduced in (1); "the house" in (14) refers back to the low cottage introduced in (13).
But this alone does not account for the remarkable frequency of the in the extract (fifty-one instances,(42), because even on their first mention, features of the scene are generally introduced by the.
The passage begins, for instance, with "the small locomotive engine" rather than  "a small locomotive engine" .
Since the function of the is to identify something which is contextually known to be unique, it tends to signal continuity on a contextual, rather than textual level: Lawrence makes a pretence of shared knowledge with the reader, who by implication is already familiar with the surroundings, is already an inhabitant of the fictional world.
There is nothing unusual about this in itself: using the as an aspect of in medias res technique (see 5.5.2) is commonplace, and we find one or two examples in the Conrad passage (eg "the tug" ,(5)).
But Lawrence's pervasive use of the is exceptional, extending even to "the colt" , and to insignificant topographical details such as "the marshy strip that led to the whimsey" (6).
But it is noticeable that on all three occasions when human  beings are brought on the scene, they are introduced by indefinite noun phrases: "a woman" (3), "miners" (I 2), and"a woman (19).
This makes them stand out as new and unfamiliar against the industrial background, as if they are somehow out of place.
Other contextual features
This use of the definite article is part of a more general strategy of sympathetically involving the reader.
We have seen other examples in the local flavour of words like whimsey, and phrases like "being turned up" .
Yet another is the use of numbers and names: the locomotive in the very first sentence is named as "Number 4" it comes "from Selston" , and it draws "seven full waggons" .
No one but a native would consider such details, uninformative to the outsider, as worthy of note.
So, by suggestion, Lawrence invites us to become members of the mining community, and to share the lot of the shadowy miners and the stooping housewife.
The third-person narration of Lawrence is paradoxically more humanly subjective than the first-person narration of Conrad.
In The Secret Sharer, the narrator-reader relationship is objectified by the use of "I" , so that we feel the observer as being a separate identity from ourselves, however much we may be invited to share his vision.
But in the Lawrence passage, there is no such intermediary to deflect us from direct participation in the fictional world.
3.5 HENRY JAMES: EXAMPLE III
The opening passage of Henry James's The Pupil resembles the preceding extract in its in medias res technique, but in other respects one could scarcely find two more dissimilar beginnings to a story.
James raises the curtain on his tragi-comedy of social relations in the middle of a conversation — in fact, in the middle of a rather uncomfortable interview between two strangers.
Many differences of language between this and the other passages can be attributed to different subject matter: James is concerned with a world of human values and relationships, and the external universe of nature has no part to play in it.
At the same time, we shall be able to identify features of style which belong  not so much to the subject, as to James's characteristic way of handling it.
From Henry James, The Pupil The poor young man hesitated and procrastinated: it cost him such an effort to broach the subject of terms, to speak of money to a person who spoke only of feelings and, as it were, of the aristocracy (1).
Yet he was unwilling to take leave, treating his engagement as settled, without some more conventional glance in that direction than he could find an opening for in the manner of the large, affable lady who sat there drawing a pair of soiled gants de Suede through a fat, jewelled hand and, at once pressing and gliding, repeated over and over everything but the thing he would have liked to hear (2).
He would have liked to hear the figure of his salary; but just as he was nervously about to sound that note the little boy came back — the little boy Mrs Moreen had sent out of the room to fetch her fan (3) He came back without the fan, only with the casual observation that he couldn't find it.
As he dropped this cynical confession he looked straight and hard at the candidate for the honour of taking his education in hand (5).
This personage reflected, somewhat grimly, that the first thing he should have to teach his little charge would be to appear to address himself to his mother when he spoke to her — especially not to make her such an Improper answer as that (6).
When Mrs Moreen bethought herself of this pretext for getting rid of their companion, Pemberton supposed it was precisely to approach the delicate subject of his remuneration (7).
But it had been only to say some things about her son which it was better that a boy of eleven shouldn't catch (8).
They were extravagantly to his advantage, save when she lowered her voice to sigh, tapping her left side familiarly: "And all overclouded by this, you know — all at the mercy of a weakness —(9) Pemberton gathered that the weakness was in the region of the heart (10).
He had known the poor child was not robust: this was the basis on which he had been invited to treat, through an English lady, an Oxford acquaintance, then at Nice, who happened to know both his needs and those of the amiable American family looking out  for something really superior in the way of a resident tutor (11).
A:Lexical features
Nouns
In comparison with the other two passages, this one has a rather low frequency of nouns (4); moreover, over half of these nouns are abstract (20), referring to entities which exist on a social or psychological plane: effort, subject, terms, money, feelings and aristocracy all occur in the first sentence.
Adjectives
Similarly, James makes sparse use of adjectives (6), and of those that occur, many have nothing to do with physical attributes: unwilling, conventional, affable, casual, cynical, etc.
Verbs
In contrast, verbs are particularly frequent in the passage (5); but this does not mean that it is full of action.
The copula occurs as frequently as twelve times (out of sixty-five main verbs), and other categories of verb which are prominent include those denoting attitudes (hesitated, liked, treating, etc), cognitions (known, supposed, reflected, etc), speech acts (speak, repeated, address, invited, etc), and perceptions (hear, looked, appear, etc).
Adverbs
The most notable classes of adverb are those of manner (straight, nervously, familiarly, etc) and of degree (somewhat, precisely, extravagantly, etc), together with focusing adverbs such as only and even 34–36)
General
In contrast to Lawrence's simpler and more homely vocabulary, James seems to prefer rather more formal Latinate terms: procrastinated, reflected, remuneration, observation, confession, etc.
It is easy to Find more simple language in which the same ideas might have been expressed in a more humdrum context: delay for procrastinate, for example, or pay for remuneration.
The  loftier tone of these words blends with a certain tendency to affectation (the gallicism gants de Suede), and to euphemism (payment is referred to by terms and remuneration, the child's ill-health is glossed over in the noun weakness and the negative phrase "not robust" ).
There is also a tendency towards circumlocution, particularly in combinations of a verb with an abstract object, as in "take leave" , "sound that note" , and "dropped the cynical confession" .
But mingled with these linguistic mannerisms are colloquial turns of phrase like "getting rid of" and "shouldn't catch" .
James exploits the associative meaning of words, but in a different way from Lawrence.
In his choice of words such as aristocracy, cynical, honour, improper, acquaintance, it is the social connotations which are important.
For example, the adjectives affable and amiable which describe Mrs Moreen and her family refer to a superficial benignity of manner, rather than to the more solid social qualities which would be suggested by such Anglo-Saxon equivalents as friendly and kind-hearted.
B: Grammatical features
Sentence structure
James's sentences in this passage are on the average much shorter than those of Conrad (35 words per sentence).
At the same time, the impression is that James's syntax is more involved.
This may be caused to some extent by the general abstractness of the language; but it is also a matter of the kinds of syntactic presentation and complexity that James favours:(i) Just as he seems to avoid calling a spade a spade, so James seems to avoid putting first things first.
He tends to mention antecedent events after subsequent ones, and causes after effects.
The two longest sentences in the passage,(2) and (11), show this clearly.
In (2), the independent clause begins "He was unwilling to take leave…" , the phrase "take leave" indicating the end of a meeting with another person: but neither the identity of the other person nor the nature of the meeting has yet been revealed.
Only later in the sentence is his interlocutor described; even here, though, the description is limited to her outward  appearance and behaviour: "the large affable lady to hear" .
Further enlightenment is delayed until (11), which at last explains how the interview came to take place at all; but again, this information is postponed to the end of the main clause, in the relative clause "on which he had been invited which in turn contains a further relative clause" who happened to know…resident tutor".
Here we are told for the first time such details as that the Moreens are American, that they require a resident tutor for their sickly child, and that Pemberton is looking for the tutor's job; or rather, we are not told, but are led to infer these facts, for James avoids a direct statement of them.
(ii) The sequence in which pieces of information are released is only part of what is odd about this way of putting things.
It is also to be noted that the factual antecedent information is backgrounded by being placed in subordinate positions in these sentences (see 7.5.1).
The following is a skeleton diagram of the clause structure of (11), and we note that the progressive embedding of one clause in another follows the retrogressive path of Pemberton's mind reconstructing the sources of his present predicament:
(iii) The occurrence of anticipatory structure (7.5.4) is another  source of difficulty in James's syntax.
This sometimes takes the form of one or more anticipatory subordinate clauses before the verb of the main (superordinate) clause, as in this section of (2): "and, at once pressing and gliding, repeated over and over The common occurrence of parenthetic structures can also be noted: " somewhat grimly "(6);" tapping her left side familiarly "(9);" then at Nice"(11).
Anticipatory and parenthetical structures increase difficulty because they require the reader's mind to store up syntactic information which it will use later on (see 7.5.3–4).
A similar processing difficulty is caused by relative and comparative clauses in which the introductory word (who, which, than, etc) has an embedded syntactic function; for example in (8): "some things about her son [which it was better that a boy of eleven shouldn't catch]" .
Although which occurs at the head of the relative clause, its syntactic function is actually as object of the verb (catch) of the that-clause which is subordinate to the relative clause.
Therefore we cannot make syntactic sense of which until we get to the end of the sentence.
These apparent perversities of James's syntax become meaningful in the light of an appraisal of his particular concern with psychological realism: his unremitting endeavour to pin down the psychological moment "in the full complexity of its circumambient conditions" .
The passage has virtually no narrative progression: indeed, it begins more or less at the end of the interview.
We are introduced to Pemberton at the point where he is screwing up courage to say something about money, and all that happens in the subsequent two paragraphs is that the boy returns and his effort is frustrated.
In between times, a whole psychological scenario is elaborated, in which we piece together the flavour of his anxiety about the pay, his disappointment at not getting the information out of the lady, his interpretation of what she is like (inferred from her appearance, actions, and conversation), his assessment of her son, his misunderstanding of the son's errand, and his recollection of how he came to be involved in the interview.
In the vague reference to "his needs" in the last sentence we even get a glimpse of why the question of money is so important for him.
The progression  is determined largely not by time sequence, but by other connections.
James grapples with this insuperable problem: that whereas for the human sensibility one moment holds a myriad of simultaneous conditions and possibilities, for the writer and reader one thing must come after another.
Although he cannot escape from the linearity of language (see 7.2, 7.5.3), James does the next best thing, which is to fasten our attention initially on the most immediate feature of Pemberton's predicament: his uncomfortable sense of indecision, and then to expatiate on it so that by the time we have threaded our way through two paragraphs, we have built up a sensitive grasp of the coexisting intricacies and ironies of that predicament (the ironies will concern us in section C below).
Thus progression means not so much going from before to after, as from the more immediate to the more remote circumstances which impinge on the central character's consciousness.
It is for this reason that James's style here is more expository than narrative.
An important part of the technique is delay of clarification, for immediate clarification, in the nature of things, cannot be supplied without oversimplification.
When James begins with the simple statement "The poor young man hesitated and procrastinated" , he begs such questions as: Who was the young man?
Why was he hesitating and procrastinating?
Where was he?
And the answers to those questions will in turn beg further questions, as we apprehend more and more of the situation (see 5.2, 5.5.2).
It is necessary for the reader's initiation into James's world that he should hold his convictions in suspense, ie he should be aware that more things are hidden than have yet been shown.
In this, the role of delaying syntax is to postpone the interpretation of one structure until another has been taken in, so that they ultimately make sense as a whole rather than in sequence.
Subordinate clauses
By one measure, James's syntax is more complex than Conrad's: his ratio of dependent clauses to independent clauses is over 3:1 (46).
A large proportion of his dependent clauses are in fact noun clauses which complement verbs (49, 53); such clauses are entirely absent from the Conrad and Lawrence passages.
They are either finite that clauses (although the conjunction  that may be omitted: "He had known [that]the poor child was not robust" (ii)); or else infinitive clauses ( "He would have liked to hear the figure of his salary" (3)).
The frequency of such clauses is not surprising, since they express some proposition or thought which is related, by the main clause, to the person experiencing it.
These constructions are the stuff of James's psychological elaboration, since he is concerned not so much with the relation between persons and persons, or between persons and things, as between persons and psychological states and events.
The use of infinitive clauses is particularly remarkable: James has thirteen of these, whereas Conrad and Lawrence have only three between them.
Since infinitive clauses are generally non-factive, this indicates how much of James's psychological web is woven out of possibilities and hypotheses, rather than known facts.
Verb phrases
A factor related to the above is the relatively high incidence of complex verbs phrases in the extract (59–62): unlike the other two writers, James makes substantial use of modal and aspectual auxiliaries in such phrases as "would be" , "shouldn't catch" , could find "," would have liked "," had been invited "," had been".
These involve awareness not only of a narrative point of time, but of circumstances which, in relation to that point, are past, future, or hypothetical.
Such auxiliaries are rare in the Conrad and Lawrence passages.
In James they are a further indication of the ramifications of consciousness: past memories, future expectations and hypothetical suppositions are as much implicated in the would-be tutor's predicament as what is happening at the time.
Negatives
In commenting on James's use of negation, Watt raises the philosophical point that "there are no negatives in nature, but only in the human consciousness" .
-We may go further, and affirm that a negative is used, generally speaking, when there is need to deny some expectation (in the mind of author, reader, character) that the positive is true.
In other words, a negative cancels the expectation of its positive.
Hence negation can be a device for irony and comedy, as is amply shown in this  passage.
The negative particle not occurs four times (twice in its suffixed form n't), but more important are instances of implied negation: only ( "no more than, nothing else than" ) occurs three times, without twice, and there are in addition the negative prefixes of unwilling, improper, and the wards but (2), save (9) expressing exception.
From one point of view, this passage portrays a comedy of disappointed expectations, and the subtlety of it comes from the fact that not only Pemberton's expectations are in question, but those of Mrs Moreen and her son, as interpreted predominantly through the mind of Pemberton.
It is partly by following the intimations of the negatives that we feel the pressure of his own expectations and of the expectations that Mrs Moreen seems to have with regard to him.
C: Figures of speech etc
Irony
We look in vain for strikingly deviant or schematic uses of language in James.
His method is rather to suggest ambivalences of meaning by subtle deviations from expectation.
There are one or two mild metaphors and  parallelisms , but these tend to serve the purpose of irony (see 8.4–5), which is the overarching figure of speech in this passage.
For example, Mrs Moreen's remark "And all overclouded by this, you know- all at the mercy of a weakness" (9) has the anaphoric repetition of all at the beginning of successive clauses, and has two banal colloquial metaphors in the expressions "overclouded" and "at the mercy of" .
These rhetorical features seem, however, to suffer from being at odds with the rest of the passage, as if James wants us to catch in them a certain false emotionalism in the tone of the speaker.
This impression is backed up by the following sentence, which stands out as being the shortest and most straightforward sentence in the extract: Pemberton gathered that the weakness was in the region of the heart (10).
We must assume that this sentence is meant ironically because it says nothing other than what can be inferred from the preceding  sentence: Pemberton registers this completely obvious fact, the location of the illness, from Mrs Moreen's somewhat overdramatized confidentiality.
The irony is primarily at the expense of Mrs Moreen (a lady less refined than she would like to appear), and secondarily at the expense of Pemberton (whom we smile at and with over his impotence to get at the information he wants).
Irony is perhaps too harsh a word for an incongruous and humorous awareness that things are not as they seem, for either of these characters.
But whatever we call it, this sense that words do not just have their face-value meaning, but are to be critically interpreted as indicators of tone and attitude, is an essential part of James's technique.
Other ironic signals are:
(i) negation: The double negative"unwilling without (2), for example, suggests a contrast between the willingness that seems to be expected of Pemberton and the reluctance that his own circumstances force upon him.
(ii) collocations: There is an associative incongruity in the way words are combined in such phrases as: "fat jewelled hand" and "soiled gants de Suede" .
The unappealing qualities fat and soiled influence their more agreeable neighbours jewelled and gants de Suede, which by contamination come to seem pretentious.
This is one technique which James shares with Lawrence.
(iii) disparities of register and tone: We have already noted euphemisms, genteelisms and circumlocutions, where the choice of locution seems too inflated for the occasion.
Subtle mixing of tone points to an ironic interpretation of these phrases: for instance, the preciosity of bethought herself contrasts oddly with the colloquial bluntness of getting rid of in "When Mrs Moreen bethought herself of this pretext for getting rid of their companion" (7); and in the final clause of the passage, the colloquial "looking out for" foregrounds the specious gentility of "something really superior in the way of a resident tutor" .
D: Cohesion and context
Elegant variation
James's partiality for elegant variation (69) is well illustrated in the passage, particularly in the way he varies the manner of referring to the three characters.
In the first paragraph, Pemberton is referred to as "the poor young man" (1), "the candidate for the honour of taking his education in hand" (5) and"this personage (6), as well as by the standard devices of name and pronoun.
Similarly, Mrs Moreen is called "a person who spoke only of feeling and, as it were, of the aristocracy" (1), "the large, affable lady who sat there liked to hear" (2), and "his mother" (6).
Moreen Junior becomes "the little boy" (3), "his little charge" (6), "their companion" (7), "her son" (8), "the poor child" (11).
Clearly such references are not merely longwinded substitutes for a name: they draw attention now to this, now to that aspect of the same person, and so build up a many-sided picture of each character.
Thus the boy is seen at one point in relation to Pemberton ( "his little charge" ), at another in relation to Mrs Moreen ( "her son" ), and at another in relation to both ( "their companion" ).
These viewpoints are complementary, and form part of the multidimensional awareness which James's style fosters.
In this context, elegant variation lends itself to irony.
The rather pompous periphrasis "the candidate for the honour of taking his education in hand" doubtless represents the boy's self-centred view of Pemberton, but in language quite above the boy's apparently limited powers of expression: what it seems to express is Pemberton's image of himself as he sees it reflected through the mind of the child.
Similarly, "this personage" , a mock dignified label for Pemberton himself perhaps fits the rather forbidding image he presents to the child, as well as reflecting sadly on Pemberton's own lack of dignity in the situation in which he finds himself.
Coreference generally
James is careful in making coreferential links between one sentence and another, as he unravels step by step the complications of the situation.
The types of sentence connection used are various.
Sentence (3) takes up the content of its predecessor by repeating the whole phrase "he would have liked to hear" ;(10) repeats the word weakness from (9); in (5), "this cynical confession" refers, in different words, to the "casual observation" just mentioned in (4).
The demonstratives this, and that occur eight times in a connective function ( "sounds that note" (3), "this pretext" (7), etc), and personal pronouns are also heavily used (66–68).
Prominent, too, is the use of adversative connections: yet in (2), but in (3) and (8).
These, like the negative forms, indicate the conflict between expectation and fact.
All these features of cohesion indicate the author's concern with the interrelatedness of individual circumstances within a complex psychological whole.
But here, too, he employs the strategy of delaying clarification.
Sentence (2) leaves us in mid-air, guessing what the "thing" may be that Pemberton would like to hear";(3) provides the answer, but only in part.
Sentence (10) tells us of a "weakness" of the "heart" , but not until (11), where this matter is taken up again in the expression "the poor child was not robust" , do we learn that it provided a reason for the present interview: it was for this reason (we surmise) that the Moreens wished to engage a resident tutor.
The same strategy is at work in elegant variation.
The introduction of characters "names is strangely delayed — but this is accountable if we consider that names have a low priority in the elaboration of psychological reality: if James had begun his first sentence: " Pemberton hesitated and procrastinated", he would have succeeded in giving his main character a label, and nothing else.
The son is introduced first, uninformatively, as "the little boy" , as if that is the only appellation that characterizes Pemberton's immediate awareness.
This is immediately expanded to "the little boy Mrs Moreen had sent out of the room to fetch her fan" — again, a point of immediate situational relevance, but involving a step from the present into the recent past.
Later we find Pemberton speculating about his future role with respect to "his little charge" , but at that stage we can only guess what this role will be.
Later still, the boy is acknowledged to be Mrs Moreen's "son" , but that he is the prospective pupil"in the story's title is a fact that James does not bring into the open until the end of the passage.
Thus throughout a reading of the passage, we are learning some things, and surmising others.
The task the reader is set is rather like that of completing a jigsaw puzzle, where we are given a few pieces at  a time, and have to keep guessing what the rest of the picture will be like.
The technique may be a taxing one for us as readers, but it ensures that in seizing on details, we shall not lose sight of the ramifications of the whole.
Context
The passage is almost entirely in third-person narration.
There is a little direct speech ( "And all overclouded by this, you know…" ) and indirect speech ( "the casual observation that he couldn't find it" ), but otherwise there are no clear signals to countermand the assumption that we are reading an impersonal narrator's version of events.
On the other hand, it is intuitively obvious that at least for most of the passage we are inside Pemberton's consciousness.
This comes in part from the use of Indirect Thought (see 10.2) constructions (with that clauses or infinitive clauses as complements).
These express the content of Pemberton's inner consciousness: "Pemberton gathered that the weakness was in the region of the heart" (10): "he would have liked to hear the figure of his salary" (3).
Elsewhere Pemberton's status as "reflector" (seep 174) is evident in the assertion of statements which no one but he would be in a position to verify: "it cost hint such an effort to broach the subject of terms" .
But there are occasions when this is not so clear.
For example the opening clause, without further context, could be seen as another person's view of Pemberton, derived from observation of his behaviour: "The poor young man hesitated and procrastinated" , but from what follows this is less likely.
More obviously, in (7), we appear to have an inside view of Mrs Moreen: "When Mrs Moreen bethought herself of this pretext…" .
With subsequent context, however, even this can be interpreted as mediated through the mind of Pemberton, who after all is able to draw his own conclusions from Mrs Moreen's fairly obvious strategy of ridding them of the boy's company.
So all in all, since most of the passage is told from Pemberton's point of view, we are led in the absence of contrary evidence into taking the whole passage in that light.
This demonstration illustrates a characteristic ambivalence of point of view in James's writing: although one character is evidently the "centre of consciousness" , there are times when we seem to have an outside view of 110 him, or an inside view of another character.
But, to add a further twist, even these shifts of point of view are reconcilable with a unitary consciousness, for they may be interpreted as the main character's sense of what others are thinking and feeling.
Such ambivalence makes shifts of register suggestive, for they tend to imply that we are listening to this or that person's manner of speaking, and to shift point of view accordingly.
Colloquialism is a useful clue.
The qualification "as it were" in (1) suggests Pemberton's own inner voice; "that he couldn't find it" in (4) suggests the boy's peremptory style of speech; something really superior in the way of a resident tutor"(11) suggests the Moreens' way of expressing their requirements in the style of genteel private advertisements.
On other occasions we detect language which can only be that of James, the third-person narrator.
The opening phrase"The poor young man is significant in this respect: since it can hardly be treated as Pemberton's own self-pitying assessment of himself, it must be taken as the author's narrative voice; and thus establishes, from the beginning, a relation between the author and the main character which is at the same time sympathetic and distanced.
Shifts of register therefore work with other indications of point of view to give a multidimensional sense of situation.
There are insights into different characters, but one character has the privileged position of "centre of consciousness" , and the author does not relinquish his controlling position as third-person narrator.
3.6 CONCLUSION
In analysing these three passages in terms of a selection of their stylistic features, we have no doubt lost a great deal by isolating them from their literary context.
We have also, by dividing our observations into different linguistic categories, separated things which from the literary point of view should be brought together.
But through cross-connections between one section and another, there has emerged a common literary focus on which linguistic features of widely differing kinds seem to converge.
In Conrad, for example, the focus lies in the sense of individual man vividly exploring and seeking to comprehend the  elusive data of his alien environment.
In Lawrence, it is natural man that we see threatened by the meretricious energy of his industrial environment, which renders nature lifeless and artificial.
In James, it is civilized, social man negotiating and experiencing a world of irreducible ambivalence and complexity.
All three writers deal with a haunting problem which humanity faces in coming to terms with its lot.
But these abstract generalizations are facile and reductive, as all such abstractions are.
The discovery that varied aspects of a writer's style point towards a common literary purpose is something that can only be demonstrated through the details of stylistic analysis.
And this discovery of unity in diversity, by which stylistic analysis is ultimately justified, cannot be abstracted or summarized.
3.7 QUANTITATIVE APPENDIX
Our final task in this chapter is to bring together, for reference, a selection of the quantitative data by which the stylistic analysis of our three passages is supported.
In Table 3.1 the figures for the three extracts of Conrad, Lawrence, and James, are set side by side, so that there is some standard of comparison, some "relative norm" , however limited (see 2.4), for judging the significant properties of each text.
For external comparison, we give in the right hand column of the table, a comparable figure (where available) derived from a fairly representative sample of modern English.
Of course the table, like the preceding stylistic analyses, has to be selective.
Since the passages are of approximately the same length, it has not been felt necessary to give percentages in those parts of the table where numbers are small.
Moreover, we have included only three of the four sections of our "checklist" presented in section 3.1 (p75–80).
The section on figures of speech, in the nature of things, deals with stylistic features which cannot be precisely quantified.
The same is true, to a lesser extent, of many of the categories included in the table, particularly categories such as "Verbs of motion" and "Evaluative/Emotive adjectives" which involve judgements of meaning.
Although the criteria may be unclear, they have been applied impartially to the three extracts, and to this extent, the  figures may be taken as a reliable guide.
The letters (a),(b),(c) etc in the table refer to the explanatory notes preceding the table.
The asterisked entries are those which show significant differences between the passages according to the chi square test of statistical significance.
Explanatory notes (Table 3.1)
(a)(18) There is some discrepancy between the number of orthographic words (see 1) and the number of syntactic words: for example, we count couldn't as two syntactic words (modal auxiliary + negative particle), but a few as one syntactic word (determiner).
(b)(19–43) This part of the table breaks down word classes into subclasses such as "human nouns" .
The subclasses are not exhaustive, and their incidence should be compared with that of the general word classes (4–16) to which they belong.
The categories selected are, in the main, those which illustrate obvious contrasts between the extracts.
(c)(25) We include under "psychological verbs" verbs of feeling (liked), thought (supposed), and perception (hear).
(d)(32) Adverbs of location include those referring to position (here) and direction (home).
(e)(33) Adverbs of time include not only adverbs of "time when" such as then, but adverbs of duration and frequency such as always.
(f)(45) Dependent clauses include both finite clauses (48–52) and non-finite clauses (53–6).
We break down finite clauses into functional categories (adverbial clause, relative clause, etc), and non-finite clauses into formal categories (infinitive, verbless, etc).
(g)(57–8) These figures are percentages of the total nouns in each sample (4).
They thus indicate the frequency with which nouns are pre- and post-modified, which is a rough measure of complexity in noun phrases.
(h)(62) Under "passive voice" we include instances of the passive or -ed participle (anchored, abandoned, etc).
(i)(65) Our count of "lexical repetition" registers second and subsequent occurrences of words of major word classes.
Levels of style
At the conclusion to Chapter 1 we provisionally adopted a multilevel concept of style, whereby more or less equivalent choices at a particular linguistic level could be seen as STYLISTIC VARIANTS, and in which these variants could be associated with STYLISTIC VALUES, or special significances associated with one variant rather than another.
We shall now take this conception of style further, in order to lay the groundwork for examining communicative effects of style in more detail in Part II.
But to do this, it will be necessary to take a closer look at language as a system of communication, and at the way in which it operates in non-fictional as well as fictional contexts.
4.1 LANGUAGE AS A COGNITIVE CODE
Language is often compared to a code, and we have also used this analogy in earlier chapters.
The analogy has its limitations, but is a valuable starting point.
The first observation to make is that as a code, language is multilevelled.
The dualist position, as we saw in Chapter I, distinguishes only between the two levels of "expression" and "content" .
But even if we restrict ourselves to the ideational or cognitive function of language (see p 31ff) it is necessary to distinguish three levels of organization in language.
In addition to the level of SEMANTICS (meaning), there are the levels of SYNTAX and PHONOLOGY, which together form the expression plane of language.
These two levels constitute what is often referred to as the "double articulation" of linguistic form: phonology being the "sound pattern" of the language (phonemes, stress, rhythm, intonation), and syntax  being, roughly speaking, the abstract grammatical and lexical form of language.
The distinction between grammar and lexis which we used in the last chapter cuts across this distinction between levels.
Syntax (in the broad sense in which it is commonly used today) is the level of lexico-grammatical form which mediates between the levels of sound and meaning.
Thus it includes both lexical choice — choice of words from the vocabulary of the language — and the grammatical choices involved in combining these words into sentences.
Considered primarily as a means of spoken communication, language has been regarded, both traditionally and in modern linguistics, as a system for translating meanings in the speaker's mind into sounds, or conversely, for translating sounds into meanings in the hearer's mind.
Whether we think of the ENCODING (meaning-to-sound) or the DECODING (sound-to-meaning) process, syntax is the formal code which mediates between structures of meaning and structures of sound.
Since literature is normally encountered in the written medium, a fourth level of organization and analysis must be given its place: that of GRAPHOLOGY, the writing system.
The syntactic form of a sentence must be rendered either in speech or in writing, so graphology is an alternative system of realization to phonology.
But it would be a mistake to suppose that a written sentence has no phonology.
When we read a poem silently, we are still aware of its phonological structure of rhythm, rhyme, etc.
In prose reading, this unvocalized realization is normally less obvious, and no doubt varies in strength from writer to writer, from reader to reader, and from one situation to another.
But the phonological potential is always there, and the exploitation of rhythmic, onomatopoeic, and other auditory effects in prose bears witness to it.
Some people when they read a novel, claim to "hear" it as well.
Whether or not this is true of all of us, it is clear that we have the ability to react, when the situation demands it, to the unspoken sound of a written text.
Thus a very simple view of the operation of language as a coding system can be represented as follows: The broken line in this diagram indicates that although phonology is not actually realized in a written text, it is there "by implication" .
In English, in fact, graphology is largely derived from phonology: our alphabetic writing system represents, however imperfectly, the sounds of speech, and punctuation, at least in part, duplicates the roles of stress and intonation in spoken discourse.
Before we go on to illustrate and extend this model, there are one or two disclaimers to be made.
First, the description of language as a code is too limiting if it conjures up analogies with signalling systems such as the morse code, or more widely with such systems of rules as the highway code or a legal code.
Such comparisons suggest a fixed set of symbols or rules which operate in a fixed way, whereas this is only partially true of language.
Language is open-ended in that it permits the generation of new meanings and new forms (for example, metaphorical meanings and neologisms).
And it also has no clearly defined boundaries as to what is in the code and what is an infringement of it.
There is no clear boundary, for instance, between a metaphorical meaning which is an institutionalized part of language, such as  "to steal a kiss" , and one which is not, such as  "a euphemistic shingle" John Updike).
It is this creative extendability of the linguistic code that we had in mind in the earlier discussion of deviation and foregrounding (see 1.4.) and to which we shall return in 4.6; but it is now time to recognize that these are relative, not absolute concepts.
If language is a code, it is a complexly ill-defined code, adaptable to the innovative skill of its users.
We must also avoid taking too simple a view of the encoding and decoding processes.
Both writing and reading are enormously complex skills, involving the coordination of sensory and cognitive processes; and although psycholinguistic research supports the structuring of these activities in terms of multilevel coding, the coding takes place simultaneously on different levels, and many other factors, such as memory span and general extralinguistic knowledge, play a part.
We cannot entertain the simplistic notion of reading as a process which proceeds by decoding the message, in real time, from one level to another.
If reading is complex, so also is writing; and when we come to the mystery of literary composition, we can scarcely begin to explain the operations of the creative mind which result in a sequence of words on the written page.
There is a further limitation of the view of language as a code.
The meanings, in this view, are part of the code, for each language organizes its view of reality, in terms of contrasts and structures, in its own way.
It is well known in linguistics, for example, that languages vary in the way they encode perceptual phenomena such as colour; and this variation is probably greater still in the conceptualization of abstract and cultural phenomena.
A speaker of English, as of any other language, is constrained to interpret the realities of his experience — whether perceptual, physical, mental, emotive or social — in ways that his language permits.
At the semantic level, as at other levels, a writer exercises choice in terms of "a grammar of possibilities" .
But this codification, or structuration of meaning, applies only to meaning narrowly, though centrally, defined as conceptual or logical meaning — what we earlier called SENSE.
There is a whole range of language communication, particularly that which involves the interrelation between speaker and hearer, which cannot be fitted into this conceptual view of semantics (see 9.1–9.1.2).
The distinction we made in 1.3.2 between SENSE (meaning in the narrow sense) and SIGNIFICANCE (meaning in the broad sense) still stands, and if two sentences are equivalent in terms of the message encoded, this certainly does not mean that they are equivalent in terms of their significance.
In studying stylistic values, we are precisely trying to determine the significances which are not part of the code itself, but are generated in its use of the code.
The aim of Part II is to  explain and illustrate the main aspects of stylistic significance.
Although these considerations make us wary of interpreting fig 4.1 too literally, they do not undermine its value as a representation of the essential core of language, and as a starting point for stylistics.
For if we can identify what features of language are equivalent in terms of the code, we shall be in a better position to study the effects of stylistic choice.
 "Equivalent in terms of the code" : this needs explanation.
Linguistic phenomena may be equivalent in the sense that at one level of coding they may be different, but at another level they may be the same.
It is the possibility of such many-one codings that justifies a multilevel model of language in the first place.
To take some simple lexical examples: judgement and judgment are two orthographic encodings, or variants, of the same (syntactic level) word; often and frequently are two syntactic level encodings of the same meaning (which is what we mean when we say they are "synonyms" ).
In the decoding direction, hard has at least two senses: one which is the opposite of "easy" , and another which is the opposite of "soft" — in other words, hard is ambiguous or polysemous.
Again, the sequence of letters 5, a, and w represents two different words, one a noun and the other a verb which is the past tense form of see.
Although stylistics is chiefly interested in encoding variants, it is in the nature of language, as a multicoding system, that the many-one mappings go in both directions:
4.2 MESSAGES AND MODELS OF REALITY
To complete the analogy between language and a code, we must talk about MESSAGES.
A code is a means of conveying messages, a vehicle of communication.
How shall we understand the term "message" as applied to language?
It is necessary, first, to go back to the distinction between SENSE and REFERENCE.
The need for this distinction is traditionally argued, by philosophers, through examples such as "the morning star" and "the evening star" .
Although these two expressions have the same referent (they both refer to the same celestial object, Venus), they differ in sense, as the evening star means "the star which appears in the evening" , and the morning star means "the star which appears in the morning" .
Here again, there are many-one mappings in both directions: just as there are expressions which are different in sense, but equivalent in reference, so there are expressions which are equivalent in sense, but can differ in reference.
Yesterday, for example, means "the day before today" on every occasion of its use.
However, if uttered on 25th June, it refers to 24th June, but if uttered on 30th June, it refers to 29th June.
It belongs to the class of items (deictics, see further 10.1.1) which vary systematically, in their reference, according to the situation in which they are uttered.
Consider the two sentences:[1]John Smith's birthday was on the twenty-fourth of June.
[2]Yesterday was my birthday.
Although these sentences differ in sense, it is quite possible for them to have the same reference, and the same truth value.
This would be the case if [2]were uttered on 25th June by the John Smith referred to in [1].
On the basis of this identity of reference, they can be said to convey the SAME MESSAGE.
That is, we may take the "message" of an utterance to be what it conveys about "the real world" .
In prose writing, the discrepancy between identity of meaning and identity of sense is well exemplified in the device of so-called elegant variation: we have already noted, for instance p107), Henry James's use of non-synonymous expressions: "the poor young man" , "this personage" , etc, as ways of referring to the same person.
But by bringing in such literary  examples, we are confronted with the question of whether the notions of "truth value" and "reference" can be applied to the mock realities of fiction.
From the linguistic point of view (and this is one way in which linguistics differs from philosophy) it is more profitable to apply terms like "truth" and "reference" to psychological realities: one is not interested in what is really the case, but what particular individuals know or believe to be the case.
Communication, in these terms, has to do with some general UNIVERSE OF REFERENCE or MODEL OF REALITY which we as human beings carry inside our heads, and which consists of all the things we know, believe, judge or understand to be the case in the world in which we live.
How we have acquired this model of reality need not concern us, nor need the complexities of its structure.
It will be sufficient to regard it as the starting point and finishing point of communication in an informational sense.
That is, when we inform someone by means of language we retrieve a message from our model of reality and by means of the encoding and decoding of language transfer it to the addressee, who then fits it into his own model of reality.
From this it is easy to go one step further and to say that the same thing happens in fictional discourse, except that it is a postulated or imagined model of reality — in short, a fiction — that is transferred to the addressee.
A crucial difference, of course, between the "real" model of reality and the "mock reality" of fiction is that the mock reality does not exist apart from the message by which it is conveyed: this is the case, at least , if we regard a fictional work in its entirety as constituting a single message.
But we shall later (4.3 and 5.2.3) have occasion to develop the view that the mock reality depends a great deal, for its understanding, on our knowledge of the real world.
Now, however, we elaborate the left hand part of fig 4. 1, in order to include this more complete picture of the communication process (restricting the diagram to written language), and to illustrate how fig 4.1 can be applied to the study of style, concentrating on stylistic variation as choice of equivalent encodings at each of the three linguistic levels:
4.3 AN EXAMPLE: KATHERINE MANSFIELD
As an illustration, we shall take a simple seven-word sentence from Katherine Mansfield's story A Cup of Tea:[3]The discreet door shut with a click.
It fits into the following part of the story, where the author describes her rich and rather spoilt heroine's exit from a high-class antique shop in London's West End:[4] "Charming!" 
Rosemary admired the flowers.
But what was the price?
For a moment the shopman did not seem to hear.
Then a murmur reached her.
 "Twenty-eight guineas, madam." 
 "Twenty-eight guineas." 
Rosemary gave no sign.
She laid the little box down; she buttoned her gloves again.
Twenty-eight guineas.
Even if one is rich…
She looked vague.
She stared at a plump tea-kettle like a plump hen above the shopman's head, and her voice was dreamy as she answered: "Well, keep it for me — will your I…
But the shopman had already bowed as though keeping it for her was all any human being could ask.
He would be willing, of course, to keep it for her for ever .
The discreet door shut with a click.
She was outside on the step, gazing at the winter afternoon.
As a means of placing this sentence stylistically, let us consider what other sentences, in some sense equivalent to this one, the author could have used in its place.
In a general sense, of course, she could have chosen any other sentence from the English language:[5]The discreet door shut with a bang.
[6]She rushed from the shop, hat in hand.
or even:[7]As the clock struck twelve, Cinderella remembered what her fairy godmother had told her.
But the vast majority of such sentences would either not fit into the story (message) meaningfully, or would alter the story to a greater or lesser degree.
It would no longer be, in this particular, the same "mock reality" .
Opened is not a stylistic alternative to shut, nor bang to click, because they describe a different event from that which the author chose to describe.
4.3.1 The semantic level
But she could also have written one of the following, which can more readily be considered variants of the original:[8]The discreet door closed with a click.
[9]There was a click as the discreet door shut.
[10]The discreet door was shut with a click.
[11]The door discreetly shut with a click.
The difference between these sentences and [5]and [6]is that they can be interpreted as descriptions of the event portrayed in [3].
This is not to say that they convey the same sense, nor that they necessarily refer to the same event; but given what we know, both about the real world and the fictional world, it is reasonable to infer from each the same event.
Inference has an important role in comprehension.
From the statement "It has been raining for an hour in Chicago" , for example, we are able to infer, using our knowledge of the real world, that the streets of Chicago are wet.
Such inferences are also available to the reader of fiction.
The mock reality of fiction has its points of overlap with our model of the real world, and indeed it can be argued that readers will assume  isomorphism between the two unless given indications to the contrary.
The overlap is great in the case of realistic fiction, and smaller in the case of fantasy.
But in general, the things which furnish the mock reality belong to classes of things which have real existence.
The door referred to in Katherine Mansfield's sentence may not have existed, but plenty of other doors, of which we have real experience, do.
So from our knowledge of entities and goings-on in the real world, as well as from our knowledge, acquired from the text, of the fictional world, we are able to postulate the nature of the fictional world, drawing inferences about matters not directly communicated by the text.
Katherine Mansfield describes the noise made by the door as a click.
From the fact that a click (as opposed to a bang, for example) is a soft, unresonant (though abrupt) noise, we are able to conclude that the door was shut without great force.
From this again, if we read with an eye to the preceding context, we can draw further conclusions of a social nature.
We are not told so, but surely we must surmise that the door was shut unobtrusively, and therefore gently, by the shopkeeper.
In this shrine of opulence, deference to one's customer requires that a shopkeeper should not appear to talk of price ( "a murmur reached her" ), nor treat his goods as merchandise ( "He would be willing…to keep it…for ever" ), nor should he appear to shut the door on his customer.
The adjective discreet (which, notice, is applied to the door rather than to the man) strengthens this inference from the "click" .
Although [8]-[11]are broadly referentially equivalent, in the sense that they "tell the same story" , there are subtle differences which invest them with different stylistic values.
In [8], closed is used instead of shut.
These verbs are very similar in sense, but it can be maintained that they are not quite synonyms, because shut focuses on the completion of the event, and so suggests an abrupt momentariness which chimes with click.6 In [9], the separation of the "shutting" and "clicking" in two clauses means that they are conceived of as separate, though simultaneous events.
It would be possible to interpret this sentence as referring to causally unconnected events — say a gunman clicking the safety-catch of his gun at the moment when the door shut.
But inference from context would rule out such an interpretation in this story.
Nevertheless, this sentence has the effect of making  the click come before the shutting, thus reversing the normal precedence of cause to effect.
Because of this, and because of its greater length, it would be more obtrusive in the context than Katherine Mansfield's sentence, and would attach greater importance to the door-shutting than seems to be required.
In [10], the intransitive verb shut is replaced by the passive was shut, which tells us that there is an implicit agent, a doer of the action.
This sentence is therefore more specific than [3], and cannot be regarded as entirely equivalent in sense.
It excludes the interpretation that the door shut of its own accord, and so leads more explicitly to the conclusion that the door was shut by the shopman.
But in any case, this is a likely inference from [3], so again the sentences are referentially virtually equivalent.
It seems that the author has deliberately left things vague by choosing the intransitive verb construction: that she wants us to have the delicately ironic impression of a deferential, high-class shop in which doors, as it were, open and shut almost of their own accord.
This is the world of self-effacing service in which the heroine moves with assurance: even if servitors are visible, it is not for her to notice them.
That this is a likely interpretation is supported by the negative evidence of another variant:[II]The door discreetly shut with a click.
By changing the adjective discreet into an adverb, this would have lost some of the force of the original, which attributes the behavioural quality of discretion metonymically to the door, an inanimate object which cannot, in literal actuality, possess it.
The author makes it seem as if in this euphemistic world, tradesmen, dealers — men of the flesh — have refined themselves out of existence, and have imparted their qualities to the shop itself, its furniture and fittings, in a general ambience of discretion.
The equivalences we have noted in these examples are not absolute, since the inferences the reader draws are a matter of high likelihood, rather than necessity.
It is often part of an author's technique to leave us in some doubt as to what precisely is going on in the fictional world, as Katherine Mansfield does here.
At the same time, the identification of such  equivalence or near-equivalence is a tool of analysis which sharpens one's awareness of the consequences of the author's choice of language.
4.3.2 The syntactic level
The above examples are termed "semantic variants" or "variant conceptualizations" because they involve differences of meaning, however slight.
It goes without saying that semantic variants also involve differences of expression — of syntax and graphology/phonology — since codings at the more abstract level of meaning have consequences of expression.
But now we turn to sentences which, though differing in syntactic form, are equivalent in sense; that is, they are paraphrases, or syntactic variants of [3]:[3]The discreet door shut with a click.
[12]With a click the discreet door shut.
[13]The discreet door clicked shut.
Unlike [9], these sentences do not treat the two events of shutting and clicking as separate things: in this respect, as in other respects,[12]and [13]are just different ways of expressing the same sense as [3].
But again there are differences of effect.
In [12], the adverbial with a click is placed before the rest of the sentence, perversely making us aware of the "click" before the "shutting" which caused it (see 7.7.1).
In [13], the change of syntactic form, although it makes the sentence more concise, has phonological consequences which appear to be undesirable.
To see this, we first have to note that the original sentence [3]has a phonological aptness to its meaning.
The word click is onomatopoeic in itself, and the neat, abrupt quality of the sound it signifies is echoed in the final /t/ consonance of discreet and shut, and by the initial /d/ alliteration of discreet and door.
In [13]this effect is accentuated because of the succession of stressed syllables ( "-creet door clicked shut" ), and because of the accompanying clattering of consonants, especially the stops /k/, /t), and /d).
We may say, in fact, that the onomatopoeic effect is here overdone, resulting in a sentence which is so cluttered with consonants, that it is difficult to say aloud.
This awkwardness  which might be successfully exploited by a writer in a different context, forces itself on the reader's attention, detracting from the force of discreet.
4.3.3 The graphological level
The lowest level of style in Fig 4.3 is the choice of graphological realizations of a given syntactic form.
For example[3]might have been divided into two separate units of information by punctuation:[14]The discreet door shut — with a click.
Or a similar division might have been made by a comma in [12]:[13]With a click, the discreet door shut.
This punctuation would have made some difference to the reader's processing of the sentence;[14]in particular would have made the "click" seem a matter of importance and surprise in its own right, dividing the reader's attention between the two events, instead of making him see them as integral parts of a whole.
Graphological variation is a relatively minor and superficial part of style (see 7.4–7.4.1), concerning such matters as spelling, capitalization, hyphenation, italicization and paragraphing.
Such matters are to a great extent determined conventionally by syntax, and become noticeably expressive only when a writer makes a graphological choice which is to some degree marked or unconventional, such as a deliberate misspelling.
This is why graphology was not given a separate heading in our checklist of stylistic features in 3.1; it was understood that such features, where of stylistic interest, would be noted under the heading of foregrounding.
Examples of unconventional graphology are found in the work of writers such as Sterne, Dickens, and Joyce, who, although widely separated in age and style, share an interest in the expressive power of the written symbol.
We may mention Joyce's habit of running words together in unbroken compounds (coffinlid, petticoatbodice), and Dickens's talking clock in Dombey and Son  (Ch 11), which overawes young Paul by its repetition of: "How, is, my, lit, tle, friend? how, is, my, lit, tle, friend?" .
4. 3.4 Phonological effects
Although a written text has no phonological level of style as such, we cannot ignore, in a treatment of levels of language, the phonological potentials of the written word.
Phonological choices form a distinct level of style in oral literature, and in written literature the implicit sound pattern can always be made explicit in reading aloud.
To a large extent, this implicit phonology is determined by choices of words and structures at the syntactic level, where it can be regarded as an important ingredient of stylistic value (see 7.6).
This has already been seen in the discussion of example [13]above.
However, since the writing system is in many respects a system for representing the sound pattern of speech, a further source of phonological effects is graphology, particularly in the evocation of a character's, style of speech in dialogue.
Dickens is a rich source of examples:[16]Mlud, no — variety of points — feel it my duty tsubmit ludship.
Begludship's pardon — boy…
So speaks the perfunctory lawyer in Bleak House (Ch 1).
Mr Podsnap, in Our Mutual Friend, speaks in capital letters when addressing foreigners: "How Do You Like London?" 
Such mimicry, of course, often extends to the use of unorthodox spelling to suggest a character's accent, as when in Bleak House the debilitated cousin's favourite word fellow gets reduced to the monosyllable fler: "" normously rich fler "," Far better hang wrong fler than no fler".
There is apparently no graphological device, whether of spelling, punctuation, capitalization, etc, that cannot be exploited for such purposes.
But because the correspondence between graphological and phonological features is far from precise, it cannot be said that a writer has actually represented the speech style of a character.
Graphological conventions are exploited impressionistically, in a way which suggests what sort of pronunciation a reader should adopt in reading aloud.
For example, the capital letters of "How Do You Like London" might suggest a number of phonetic factors  abnormal loudness, slow-motion delivery, stressing of every syllable — all expressive of the proverbial Englishman's assumption that those who cannot speak his language as a native are deaf or stupid, or both.
The significant point is that an initial capital is a form of emphasis or highlighting in writing, and therefore can be used as a visual correlative of emphasis in speech (see further 5.4.2).
4.4 A JUSTIFICATION FOR STUDYING STYLISTlC VARIANTS
Our examination of one unremarkable sentence from Katherine Mansfield's A Cup of Tea shows how it is possible to focus on the stylistic value of a piece of language by comparing with unwritten alternatives: "what might have been written, but wasn't" .
The comparison was only partial, since we considered only a selection of possible stylistic variants.
Even so, this kind of exercise probably goes against the grain for a large number of readers, who will ask "What is the point?" 
In considering variant realizations of the same message, we pointed out what seemed to be the stylistic values of the original and of the alternatives, and in passing gave reasons why none of the variants were quite so satisfactory as the original.
This gives some substance, then, to the intuition (which we hope other readers share with us) that those seven words "The discreet door shut with a click" are Just right"for their purpose.
No one would claim, of course, that they constitute a literary tour de force .
This, if anything, strengthens the claim for the analysis; for one of the problems of prose style (as contrasted with poetry) is that the ingredients of effective writing frequently seem invisible even to an attentive reader.
It is a common experience to feel that an author writes well, without being able to lay one's finger on the reasons.
Looking at the might-have-beens of stylistic variation is a way of making the elusive quality of good writing open to inspection.
Against this, two voices of protest may be heard.
The first asks: "Is it not artistic sacrilege to disturb the text?
What is written is written, and no might-have-beens enter into it."
In reply to this we may claim that only by considering unrealized  possibilities can we define the nature of a writer's achievement.
Definitions have both a positive and a negative element: what occurs is only meaningful against the background of what does not occur.
And by limiting ourselves specifically to stylistic alternatives, we can pinpoint the inferences from the text which are the basis of literary appreciation.
Naturally, when we think of unwritten possibilities, we mean those realizations which "could have been" purely in terms of the language: we do not presume to delve into the psychology of the author, or to tamper with the text itself.
A second, perhaps more plaintive voice says: "Is this not too much of a laboratory experiment?
What hope is there of saying anything about a whole work, if each small sentence deserves to be scrutinized in this way?"
The rejoinder must be: although we may generally have neither the time nor the inclination to look at literary language under the microscope in this way, the fact that it can be done is important, and the doing of it cannot fail to sharpen observation, by making us aware of how larger effects are built up from smaller ones.
In Chapter 3 we looked at the general interrelation of stylistic effects over a passage of some extent; in Chapter 2 we considered the "macro-effects" of style as manifested in whole texts.
And now, in this chapter, we have examined the "micro-effects" which are ultimately presupposed by these more extended approaches to style.
If a reader feels that such minutiae are unimportant, writers, at least, have not.
One way in which we can look over a writer's shoulder, and observe the process of composition, is by examining alterations made both in manuscript, and in revised editions of a work.
A study of these emendations reveals countless examples of the replacement of one stylistic variant by another.
Passages [17]and [18]are respectively the unemended and emended versions of a short extract from Chapter 17 of Samuel Butler's The Way of All Flesh (changes of wording have been italicized) The extract concerns the birth of the book's hero, to the younger son of George Pontifex:[17]Now, therefore, that the good news [viz of the birth of Theobald Pontifex's son]came it was doubly welcome and caused as much delight at Elmhurst as in Woburn Square [it caused dismay], where the John Pontifexes were now living.
Here, indeed, this freak of fortune was felt to be all the more cruel on account of the impossibility of resenting it openly; but this was nothing to the delighted grandfather.
He had wanted a male grandchild and he had got a male grandchild; that should be enough for everybody…[18]The good news therefore was doubly welcome and caused as much delight at Elmhurst as dismay in Woburn Square, where the John Pontifexes were then living.
Here, indeed, this freak of fortune was felt to be all the more cruel on account of the impossibility of resenting it openly; but the delighted grandfather cared nothing for what the John Pontifexes might feel or might not feel; he had wanted a grandson and he had got a grandson; this should be enough for everybody…
Butler's changes tend towards economy and tightness of expression; even the replacement of male grandchild by grandson is a slight gain in conciseness.
But in one instance, he makes the text longer: this is where he replaces "this was nothing to the delighted grandfather" by "the delighted grandfather cared nothing for what the John Pontifexes might feel or might not feel" .
The revised clause is not exactly a paraphrase of the original one, since it implies something more: the old man was not just insensitive to his elder son's feelings, but was so insensitive as to be possibly unaware of them.
The egotism of the patriarch in search of an heir is intensified; and the repetitive, parallelistic form of the new clause ( "…might feel or might not feel…) matches the parallelism in the following clause (" he had wanted a grandson and he had got a grandson") in suggesting the grandfather's own emphatic and headstrong style of speech.
On another occasion, too, the emendation strengthens the force of parallelism: "as much delight at Elmhurst as dismay in Woburn Square" .
Here, reinforced by the phonological similarity of delight and dismay, is the full ironic flavour of family greed and discord between father and son: a burden which Ernest, the innocent cause of this disharmony, will carry in his future life.
Some of the revisions are relatively trivial, but collectively, they show that the principle of stylistic variation — that there can be alternative ways of saying "the same thing" — can explain much that goes into the process of literary composition, as well as much that is involved in the reader's interpretation of the text.
4.5 LEVELS AND FUNCTIONS
We have travelled a long way from the traditional "dualist" and "monist" views of style outlined in Chapter 1.
The model of style proposed here is "pluralist" in that it allows for three distinct levels (semantic, syntactic, graphological) at which stylistic choices can be made.
This simply follows an orthodox linguist's view of language: style, like language itself is multilevelled.
There is, however, another sense in which style is complex: not just in the levels of choice, but in the values or significances which are associated with choice.
It will be remembered that when (1.5) the pluralist view of style was first introduced, it was associated with a plurality of language functions, as in the threefold functional scheme of Halliday, who distinguishes between ideational, interpersonal, and textual functions.
That is, we have two rather different kinds of plurality to deal with: Fig4.4 (A) PLURALITY OF (B) PLURALITY OF CODING LEVELS FUNCTIONS Textual Now, there is no one-to-one correspondence between levels and functions (although we shall find, in Chapters 6 and 7, some strong associations between them).
The two things are really quite separate.
The levels belong to language as a cognitive coding system.
The functions are concerned with how this system is used for communicative ends.
The term "function" , as  applied to language, relates the system to the ends which the system serves, or (to put it less teleologically) to the way it is adaptable to the needs of its users.
This distinction between the system and its use, between langue and parole, is what is reflected in the separate triads (A) and (B) in Fig 4.4.
We shall accept Halliday's three functions, although not his precise interpretation of them.
The way we shall understand them is this.
In ordinary language use, the three functions represent three coexisting ways in which language has to be adapted to its users' communicative needs.
First, it has an ideational function: it has to convey a message (in the sense of 4.2) about "reality" , about the world of experience, from the speaker to the hearer.
(Not only propositional language has a message: for example, questions and commands, as well as statements, invoke some extralinguistic reality).
Secondly, it has an interpersonal function: it must fit appropriately into a speech situation, fulfilling the particular social designs that the speaker has upon the hearer.
Thirdly, it has a textual function: it must be well constructed as an utterance or text, so as to serve the decoding needs of the hearer.
We shall have more to say about these functions in later chapters, but will meanwhile point out that these functions and the needs they serve are interrelated: success in interpersonal communication depends in part on success in transmitting a message, which in turn depends in part on success in terms of text production.
There is a strong connection between the concept of "function" , and the concept of "meaning" : when we talk of meaning in the broad sense of "overall significance" , we include the implications which an utterance has regarding the intention of the speaker and the effect on the hearer.
Thus when we refer to stylistic variation, we are concerned with the three coding levels, and when we refer to stylistic value, we are concerned with the three functions.
 "Functional significance" and "stylistic significance" are equivalent concepts, except that the former tends to be associated with non-literary, and the latter with literary language.
If we speak of the stylistic values of a non-literary text, we are interested in the way in which linguistic choices are adapted to communicative function — to such functions as newspaper reporting, advertising, scientific exposition.
The chief  difference between this and literature is that the stylistic values of literature cannot be adequately explained ill terms of a need-oriented view of language.
The function of literature being primarily aesthetic, we must search for explanations of stylistic value — Of why this linguistic choice is made rather than that in terms of considerations internal to the work itself.
But the same three macro-functions are the governing principles of stylistic choice in both literary and non-literary language.
And hence, to understand stylistic values in literature, we have to pay attention to the functional principles which apply to ordinary language.
4.6 STYLE AND QUALITATIVE FOREGROUNDING
Our aim so far has been to show that the "stylistic variant" view of style, which supports the dualist's conviction that style can be distinguished from message, can lead to a more precise understanding of what it means for a writer to choose this rather than that way of putting things.
If we define style in terms of stylistic variants, we assume that language specifies a repertoire or code or possibilities and that a writer's style consists in preferences exercised within the limits of that code.
But we have noted (4.1) that creative users of language often overstep these limits to produce original meanings and effects; and that the limits of the code are uncertain, even in grammar, where we might expect to find them determined by clear cut rules.
Does Dickens, for example, overstep the limits of grammar in beginning Bleak House with a series of sentences without main verbs?
London.
Michaelmas Term lately over, and the Lord Chancellor sitting in Lincoln's Inn Hall.
Implacable November weather.
If this telegraphic style goes beyond our standard expectations, it is certainly not such a radical deviation as the opening "sentence" of Joyce's Finnegans Wake, which is the completion of its last: riverrun, past Eve and Adam's, from swerve of shore to  bend of bay, brings us by a commodius vicus of recirculation back to Howth Castle and Environs.
So deviation is a matter of degree, and at some indefinite point it becomes significant not that a writer has chosen x rather than y or z, but that he has chosen x at all.
To put it another way, the quantitative foregrounding (2.3) of a prominent pattern of choices within the code shades into the qualitative foregrounding (3.1 C) which changes the code itself.
It is therefore necessary to bring in another model of style, that of foregrounding, to supplement that of stylistic variants.
Our discussion of opacity in 1.4. has already made this clear.
The two views of style are mutually supporting, the one applying to the level of parole, and the other to the level of langue (1.1).
Whereas the "stylistic variants" model locates stylistic effect against a background of other equivalent variants, the foregrounding model locates stylistic effect against a background of more normal or expected expressions which could have occurred.
Each model, in its own way, provides a standard for comparing choices, so that the differentness of a writer's style can be registered.
To balance 4.3, therefore, we shall give an illustrative analysis of a passage which is markedly foregrounded.
Having quoted the opening of Gormenghast in 1.4 as an example of an opaque style, we shall now return to another passage which occurs shortly after it in the same novel.
In the foregrounding model, stylistic value has a slightly different meaning from that which it has in the "stylistic variants" model: it refers to the special act of interpretation which we make in order to make sense of what would otherwise appear strange and unmotivated.
Each qualitative foregrounding implicitly begs a question: what should have led the author to express himself in this exceptional way?
For this purpose, the exceptional includes not only the sense deviations we earlier called tropes (3.1C), but also the patterns or exceptional regularities of structure that we earlier called schemes.
Like stylistic variants, foregrounded features can be observed on different levels of the code: tropes, such as metaphor, being chiefly associated with category violations (on the levels of syntax and semantics), and schemes being chiefly associated with structural patterns (on the levels  of syntax and phonology).
Tropes are therefore matters of content, and schemes matters of expression.
Our passage continues a description of Titus Groan's childhood as heir to the phantasmagorical mansion of Gormenghast:[19]Who are the characters?(1) And what has he [Titus]learned of them and of his home since that far day when he was born to the Countess of Groan in a room alive with birds?(2).
He has learned an alphabet of arch and aisle: the language of dim stairs and moth-hung rafters (3).
Great halls are his dim playgrounds: his fields are quadrangles: his trees are pillars (4).
And he has learned that there are always eyes (5).
Eyes that watch (6).
Feet that follow, and hands to hold him when he struggles, to lift him when he falls (7).
Upon his feet again he stares unsmiling (8).
Tall figures elbow (9).
Some in jewellery; some in rags (10).
The characters (11).
The quick and the dead (12) The shapes, the voices that throng his mind, for there are days when the living have no substance and the dead are active (13).
[Mervyn Peake, Gormenghast, Ch 1]Peake, like Katherine Mansfield, presents to his readers a "mock reality" .
But his fictional world defies common sense, and frustrates any attempt to separate linguistic means from fictional ends.
A difficulty of paraphrase arises even in the first sentence "Who are the characters?" 
Characters can mean either "letters, ciphers" , or "people in the fiction" , and in spite of the Who? which begins the passage, it is not clear which sense is intended here.
The second paragraph, with its mention of alphabet, answers the question in the former sense, whereas the fifth paragraph, with its liturgical reference to "the quick and the dead" , answers it in the latter.
In this way, the two meanings which are logical alternatives are illogically combined.
What is the point of this play on meaning?
A pun can act in a similar way to metaphor, pointing to a coalescence of concepts normally distinct.
The people who inhabit Gormenghast, ambivalently described as "figures" and "shapes" , are poised between the two meanings.
They are as mysteriously alien to  the child as the "alphabet of arch and aisle" , a literal nonsense which he has, nevertheless learned to make sense of.
Disconcertingly, the human world appears to have less reality for him, if anything, than the world of buildings and objects.
Already this illogicality has led us to focus not on a "mockreality" but on a mode of experience.
It is not how things are that matters, but how they seem.
The effect is very different, however, from the beginning of Joyce's Portrait (p 27), which also presents a child's version of reality, but in the artless style of the child itself Peake's style is highly artificial in a sense that applies to the style of Lyly's Euphues (1.3.1).
It is full of syntactic parallelism and other kinds of schematic patterning, as the following display shows:
The parallelisms are identified as structural repetitions in which variable elements occur.
The simplest examples in the passages are the pattern in (11)-(13) which consists of the + NJ, the N, the NJ, the N the N and the pattern in (10) consisting of some in N, some in N; in both of these the noun (N) is the only variable element.
More complex is the pattern in (I), where the sequence Determiner + N (singular) + off Noun Phrase + and + Noun Phrase is repeated.
But whatever form a parallelism takes, its effect is to foreground the relation between parallel words and phrases which fill the variable positions.
These expressions have been italicized in the diagram above.
The relations of meaning foregrounded in this way are in general relationships of similarity or of contrast; they are reinforced, here and there, by alliteration and assonance.
We notice that the words tend to fall into natural sets:
It is we, however, who have to work out the connections of similarity and contrast between the expressions in the groups A to L, which thereby become representative of something more general, which could not be expressed by simply adding together the literal senses of the words.
Paraphrases can only capture part of what these significances represent: A represents something like "things which children have to learn in order to communicate" ; B — "features of buildings (grand and ecclesiastical)" ; C — "features of buildings (plain and domestic)" ; D — "outdoor terrain for boys' amusements" ; E — "grand architectural features" , and so on.
Within the groups we also find oppositions, for example between living and dead, and (more subtly) between hostile actions (elbow) and protective actions (lift), with watch, hold, and follow keeping the balance between them.
The relationships are not always clear, and we must feel the puzzlement of the young child's attempt to find his bearings in a world of hidden meanings.
More interesting than the vertical connections are the horizontal connections (indicated by dotted lines).
These are collocational ties which in many cases defy literal interpretation, and have to be understood metaphorically.
For example, the equation through the verb to be of groups D and E associates the animate with the  inanimate , the natural with the man-made.
This direct juxtaposition of incompatibles suggests that in Titus's world such basic categories of experience are not distinct.
The dissolution of commonsense bonds of meaning is taken further when, in (13), we learn that "there are days when the living have no substance and the dead are active" .
This is paradox, rather than metaphor: two directly opposed concepts, life and death, change places with each other.
We conclude that, for Titus, not only place but also time fails to recognize the customary separation of the living from the lifeless.
We turn now to foregroundings which are less easy to recognize, because they are less absolute, and do not fit into the traditional rhetorical categories.
That "the living have no substance" has already been implied in the third paragraph, where the nouns eye, feet, hands, and figures are introduced as subjects of verbs which would more appropriately have human subjects such as men, servants, etc.
The lack of a determiner before these nouns makes them generic, and so makes us feel that the human forces that impinge on Titus's life are vague and insubstantial.
They appear to be no different from the "shapes, the voices that throng the mind" .
Further, the transitive verbs watch, follow, and (more particularly) elbow are used intransitively, so that these rather threatening actions not only have a disembodied source, but can be interpreted as having either Titus or his whole surroundings as their target.
It is as if Titus lacks the sense of his own identity, as well as that of those  around him; and so another conceptual boundary is blurred that between self and others.
There is also something grammatically unusual (comparable to the opening of Bleak House) in the occurrence of a series of parallel graphological sentences which are "defective" in that they consist of noun phrases alone: these are (10),(11) and (12), and the same construction is continued in (13).
The absence of grammatical articulation contributes a further unclarity: it is not clear, for example, how the sentences "The characters" (11) arid "The quick and the dead" (12) connect both with each other and what has gone before.
The links are not logical, but associative, and the clue to them lies in the already noted ambivalence of the word character.
There is an implied progression from the inanimate world of "alphabet" and "language" in (3) to the ambivalently human "figures" in (9), and thence to the quick and the dead"(12) who are clearly human, but poised on the uncertain ground between reality and unreality.
The polysemous "characters" in (II) provides a link in the chain.
But it is the gradualness of the progression which requires comment: here is another instance of the author's refusal to acknowledge familiar distinctions taken for granted in the literal use of language.
We hope to have shown, without further analysis, how the burden of interpretation in this passage falls principally on the reader's response to foregrounding.
The significance we attach to schemes and tropes are part of an integral process of imaginatively making sense of a strange linguistic experience.
Cumulatively the features we have examined represent the world of a child surrounded and overawed by dimly grasped presences, a world in which the meanings which shape our own response to life are dissolved and reconstituted.
We shall return to the way In which linguistic choice determines the nature of mental experience in Chapter 6.
At present, however, it is worth observing that the degree of foregrounding in this passage, and the interpretative process it elicits are of a kind more readily associated with poetry than with prose.
To emphasize the "poetic" style of the passage, let us also observe that the schematic patterning is extensive on the phonological as well as on the syntactic level, for example in the alliterations and assonances of "feet…follow" , "hands…hold" , "alphabet…arch…aisle" , "lift…fall" .
More to the point, the passage has a rhythmic regularity which enables it to be written out and scanned as poetry in a quasi-blank-verse metre: He has learned an alphabet of arch and aisle: The language of dim stairs and moth-hung rafters.
Great halls are his dim playgrounds: his fields Are quadrangles: his trees are pillars.
And he has learned that there are always eyes.
Eyes that watch.
Feet that follow, And hands to hold him when he struggles, To lift him when he falls.
Upon his feet again he stares unsmiling.
Tall figures elbow.
Some in jewellery; some in rags.
The characters.
The quick and the dead.
The shapes, The voices that throng his mind, for there are days When the living have no substance and the dead Are active.
This regularity is obviously not fortuitous.
But what stylistic value shall we attach to the metricality of prose?
Metre raises prose to the level of a musical experience, and it also adds an element of ritual inevitability to the formal patterning of words and structure we have already noted.
 "Things are so because they are so" , it seems to say.
Unlike the infant Stephen in Joyce's Portrait, Titus does not appear to us through his own childish language, but through a "web of ritual" (a phrase which occurs in the paragraph preceding our extract).
The formalistic nature of the language helps to express the mystery of unexplained tradition that governs the boy's upbringing.
4.7 THE REMAINDER OF THIS BOOK
The Gormenghast passage [19]represents a fairly extreme position on the scale of opacity, and when we turn, in the following chapters, to a more detailed study of stylistic values, we shall have little occasion to insist on the distinction we have made between the study of style in terms of foregrounding, and that in terms of stylistic variants.
In practice, both models enter into a comprehensive explanation of style and its effects.
In Part II, we shall aim to give an account of the relation  between stylistic choice and significance within a functional framework.
For this purpose, it will be useful to divide our attention between three different aspects of a literary work of fiction, corresponding to the three functions: Chapter 6: Work as MESSAGE (ideational function) Chapter 7: Work as TEXT (textual function) Chapter 8: Work as DISCOURSE (interpersonal function) These three chapters form the nucleus of our investigation of aspects of style.
But when we come to the interpersonal function, we not only have to account for the literary work itself as a discourse between author and reader, but we have to reckon with the phenomenon of "embedded discourse" : the occurrence of discourse within discourse, as when the author reports dialogue between fictional characters.
In this light, a novel is not a single discourse, but a complex of many discourses.
To deal with this extra dimension, we add Chapter 9 on conversation, and Chapter 10 on speech and thought presentation.
The only other chapter to be explained is Chapter 5 "Language and the fictional world" .
This serves as an introduction to Part II, and more particularly as a prelude to Chapter 6, because it deals with the subject of fiction itself: something which is strictly not a matter of style, but which is presupposed by the study of style in fiction writing.