

The United States of America
1 The USA before the 1920s
(1) Background
American entry into the First World War in 1917 was a great turning point of world history.
For the first time, the mighty strength of the United States was to be employed in a truly international conflict.
The USA had advanced in giant strides in the 134 years since the 13 colonies had gained their independence from Great Britain in 1783.
The 19th century had seen a bitter Civil War (1861–5), and the victory of the Union armies had prevented the splitting of the USA into two nations.
The federal system of government had survived: the major political institutions — the Presidency, the Congress and the Supreme Court — had developed, while the individual states still retained considerable powers.
Perhaps most remarkable of all was that this system of government was based on a written Constitution, drawn up by a group of politicians at the end of the 18th century and only altered on rare occasions since (there had been 19 Amendments to the Constitution by 1920).
The expansion of the USA across the continent had been an epic story as pioneers, followed by settlers, moved westwards.
It was also a violent story, with wars against the Mexicans as well as the native Indians.
Gradually the western territories became part of the Union, and the admission of Arizona and New Mexico in 1912 brought the total number of states to 48; the number was increased to 50 in 1959 by the addition of Alaska and Hawaii.
Huge numbers of immigrants, mostly from across the Atlantic, came to live in this country of over 7.7 million square kilometres.
Between 1820 and 1920 some 35 million immigrants reached the United States.
At first most came from the British Isles and northern Europe, but from the 1880s increasing numbers arrived from central, southern and eastern Europe  from the Austro-Hungarian Empire, Italy, Greece and the Russian Empire.
Many thousands of Chinese and Japanese came across the Pacific to California.
There was an enormous variety of languages, religions and customs amongst these new arrivals: their contribution to the economic, political and social development of the USA was immense.
Yet there were also great difficulties in fitting these large numbers of people into what was for them a new and strange society.
Aided by the flow of immigrants, the population of the USA grew from over five million in 1800 to almost 76 million in 1900, and over 200 million in 1970.   were the descendants of involuntary immigrants, the slaves, and by 1970 blacks numbers over 22 million.
The 19th century had witnessed a significant change in the distribution and occupations of the population.
In 1800, 90% of Americans lived in rural communities; but with the growth of industry, especially in the second half of the century, towns and cities began to spread, and by 1920 over 50% of the population lived in them.
The development of new methods of transport, especially the railroads, allied to the exploitation of the nation's plentiful resources of iron and coal, and later oil, had been the basis of a massive industrial expansion in the post-Civil War period.
By the 1880s the mines and foundries, manned by immigrant labour, had begun to outstrip their German rivals in the production of coal and steel.
Such rapid expansion made the USA the leading industrial nation in the world by the early 20th century.
It was the products of American factories that kept the Allies supplied in the First World War; it was American money that financed the Allied war effort and made the USA a creditor rather than a debtor nation by 1918.
Agriculture also expanded hugely.
The opening of the prairies by western settlers and the railroads, along with increased mechanization, brought a great increase in wheat and corn production.
The development of canning and refrigeration made the preservation of meat products possible, and there were fast steamships to carry American produce to the European market to provide a supply of cheap food.
Yet by 1914 agriculture was firmly in second place to industry in the American economy and although farmers enjoyed a boom period during the First World War, their problems were to become clear in the 1920s.
(2) The USA and the First World War
To most Americans the outbreak of war in Europe in August 1914 seemed a distant event.
Many had left Europe precisely to escape from its problems, and the majority of the people supported the position adopted by Woodrow Wilson, the Democrat who was then President.
He said that the USA should remain neutral: "neutral in fact as well as in name…impartial in thought as well as in action." 
The USA, however, found it increasingly difficult to remain outside the conflict.
Wilson insisted on America's right as a neutral to continue trading with Europe.
The British were equally determined to maintain a naval blockade of Europe to prevent supplies reaching Germany.
This led to incidents where US ships were stopped and searched.
But the German attempts to break the blockade by use of submarines (U-boats) created more serious problems.
In 1915, they sank the British liner Lusitania off the coast of southern Ireland, and among the many passengers drowned were 128 American citizens.
Wilson attempted to mediate between the powers to end the war, but neither side was prepared to give in.
As American supplies could only effectively reach the British, the American economy became heavily involved with that of the Allies, benefiting them and at the same time making considerable profits for American businessmen.
Further U-Boat attacks and the discovery of a German plot to use Mexico as a base for a possible attack on the USA, brought armed intervention in the war on the Allied side in April  1917.
Wilson's personal sympathies, and those of many of his Cabinet, were with the British cause.
Moreover, the President believed that the time had come to use the great power of the USA not only to end the war but to ensure, through a place at the Peace Conference, that he could bring about a "just peace" .
At first, there was great enthusiasm for American entry into the war — "a war to end all wars" .
The contribution of the USA to the military events of the war was short-lived but considerable.
Over a million Americans were mobilized and they helped to refresh and revive the Allied forces on the Western Front.
Over 50 000 died and 200 000 were wounded before the armistice in November 1918.
The US Navy also played an important, though often forgotten, role in the war.
American destroyers helped to cripple German U-Boats and to convoy much-needed supplies to Britain in 1917–18.
Industry and agriculture flourished in the war years though both came under great governmental control — a new experience for "free enterprise" America.
The government also interfered more sharply with individual freedom that ever before: men were drafted into the Army to man General Pershing's expedition destined for the Western Front in France; several laws were passed against spying; a form of censorship was imposed on the foreign language press in the USA; pacifists were harshly dealt with.
German-Americans were treated with suspicion: the famous German conductor of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, Bruno Walter, was suspended.
Outspoken opponents of the war like the Socialist labour leader, Eugene Debs, were imprisoned.
(3) The Peace Treaties and the League of Nations
In January 1918 President Wilson issued his peace proposals, the 14 Points (CORE, p. 20), which he believed would ensure a great and lasting peace.
He stressed two major themes: self-determination (the right of each nation to choose its own form of government and maintain national independence), and the need for a world organization of powers (the League of Nations).
He attended the Peace Conference at Versailles in person and played an important role in the decisions reached.
His political position in the USA had, however, begun to weaken even before he set out for Paris.
In 1916 he had only narrowly won re-election.
In the mid-term congressional elections (November 1918) he had appealed for wide popular support for his peace policy, but the voters, mostly influenced by domestic affairs, had given his Republican opponents a majority in both the Senate and the House of Representatives.
Further, many of the decisions reached at Versailles (CORE, p. 2) disappointed Americans, whose expectations of a fair peace had been raised by Wilson himself.
The most important issue on which doubts were raised was the role of the United States in the proposed League of Nations, set up largely through Wilson's persistent efforts in Paris.
Many Americans began to fear that membership of the League would involve the USA permanently in the affairs of Europe.
The Republican Party saw this as an issue which could be used against the Democrats in the approaching presidential election of 1920.
According to the Constitution, the treaties, including the clauses setting up  the League, had to be agreed by a two-thirds majority in the Senate.
Here the Republican majority, led by Henry Cabot Lodge, a presidential hopeful, demanded major changes in the League Covenant.
Wilson, a man who combined high ideals with a considerable obstinacy and self-righteousness, was convinced that the opposition must be overcome and refused to compromise on details.
He decided to appeal to the people on a speaking tour through the country.
In the autumn of 1919, he collapsed at Pueblo in Colorado, suffering a stroke and partial paralysis.
His incapacity ended any hopes that the Senate might pass the treaties.
2 The Twenties
(1) Politics under Harding and Coolidge 1920–28
The 1920 presidential election results in a sweeping victory for the Republican Party.
Its candidate, Warren Gamaliel Harding, carried 37 of the 48 states, with a popular vote of 16 million against nine million for his Democratic opponent.
The Republicans also made huge gains in Congress.
The growth of disillusionment with the war and the resulting peace settlement, fuelled by the debate over the League, helped to discredit the Democrats.
Yet elections are rarely a verdict on a single issue, especially one concerned with foreign affairs.
Economic difficulties were a more immediate cause of discontent with the Wilson administration.
A brief post-war boom brought inflation, which was followed by a sharp recession and unemployment.
The results were labour troubles, with a wave of strikes in 1919, and violence, with bomb outrages and threats to the lives of government officials.
Millions of Americans believed there was a left-wing plot to create chaos.
Wilson's Attorney-General, "The Fighting Quaker" A. Mitchell Palmer, organized a series of raids on Communist offices; 6000 people were arrested and 500 eventually deported.
There was no evidence of a plot and liberals were disgusted by what they saw as panic action by Palmer.
But many Americans thought the time had come for a political change to the safer conservatism of the Republican Party.
This "Red Scare" died down quickly, yet it left a legacy of suspicion about radicals and "foreign" agitators.
Harding's election appeal was a call for "normalcy" : "America's present need is not heroics, but healings; not nostrums but normalcy" .
In appearance the most handsome of all American Presidents, Harding looks the part, while his vague and soothing phrases sounded right.
In fact he had few qualifications for great office.
An undistinguished Senator from Ohio, he had been nominated as a compromise candidate at the Republican convention.
He confessed his limitations, saying once: "I am a man of limited talent from a small town — I don't seem to grasp that I am President." 
A critic later wrote that Harding's genius lay not so much in his ability to conceal his thoughts as in the absence of any serious thoughts to conceal.
His shortcomings were somewhat concealed by the appointment of a number of distinguished men to his administration, including Charles Evans Hughes as Secretary of State and Herbert Hoover as Secretary of Commerce.
But places were also found for several of Harding's poker-playing Ohio cronies, whose activities were later to tarnish the reputation of the administration — such men as Harry Daugherty, the Attorney-General, Albert Fall, Secretary of the Interior, and Charley Forbes, Head of the Veterans"Bureau.
For this government is chiefly remembered for the financial scandals of which the President remained blissfully unaware until just before his death from a heart attack in 1923.
The most notorious was the Teapot Dome scandal.
Two oilfields, Teapot Dome in Wyoming and Elk Hills in California, had been administered by the Department of the Navy, as part of a strategic oil reserve.
Albert Fall arranged for their transfer to the Department of the Interior, and then leased them in secret to two private oil magnates from whom, it was later revealed, he had received substantial bribes — some $300 000 and a herd of pedigree cattle.
The leases were cancelled and Fall was sent to jail.
Forbes, too, ended up in prison for swindling the government over supplies to hospitals.
Daugherty missed a like fate only because he juries at his two trials failed to agree.
Surprisingly, the scandals had little political effect.
By 1923 the country was very prosperous and the general public did not seem to be particularly shocked by the revelations.
Moreover, Calvin Coolidge, the Vice-President who took over from Harding, was a New Englander of puritanical honesty who had won national fame by saying, when the Boston police went on strike in 1919, that there was "no right to strike against the public safety by anybody, anywhere, any time" .
His competent handling of the investigation into the scandals successfully defused the affair.
In 1924, with the slogan "Keep Cool with Coolidge" , he easily retained the presidency for the Republicans, carrying 35 states to the Democrats' 12; 15 million Americans voted for him, while 8 million voted for the Democrat candidate and nearly 5 million for Robert La Follette, a Progressive "third party" candidate.
 "Silent Cal" , with his belief that "the business of the United States is business" , was a president whom Americans could trust.
He was also one who believed it his role to ensure that business flourished with the least possible government intervention.
(2) Economic Policy, 1921–9
After the immediate post-war difficulties, the American economy flourished.
The Republican governments of the 1920s allied themselves firmly to big business, and gained political credit from this prosperity.
War-time controls were removed; railroads and shipping returned to private corporations.
The regulation of big business by Federal Commissions was reduced to a minimum.
Only rarely did its opponents win a victory like that of George Norris, the progressive Republican Senator who successfully opposed government plans to sell off dams and nitrogen-processing plants at Muscle Shoals in the Tennessee Valley.
Norris believed that such national assets should remain in government hands (pp. 30–1).
The Republicans believed in keeping government expenditure as low as possible, and in cutting taxes to provide incentives for investment.
Andrew Mellon, the Secretary of the Treasury who before his government post had held directorships in 60 business corporations, proposed massive tax reduction on personal and corporate wealth.
Though his proposals were whittled down in Congress, the Revenue Act of 1921 and later measures provided for big tax cuts on high personal incomes and the removal of the excess profit tax.
The Republican administration of the 1920s also responded to the desire of business for protection against foreign competition.
The Fordney-McCumber Tariff Act of 1922 raised duties on foreign goods to the highest level ever known in American history.
This was welcomed by American businessmen, although it helped to disrupt international trade as other countries retaliated by raising their duties.
The new tariff also made payment of war debts by European countries to the USA more difficult since it prevented them from selling more goods to America than they bought from the new world.
Agriculture also suffered.
Protection was of little use to farmers in a period of declining world prices for agricultural products, while the machinery and other industrial goods they bought would be dearer.
Labour organizations, or trade unions, were still weak in the USA in the  1920s.
Skilled workers had the largest organizations: the American Federation of Labor (AF of L) and the Railway Brotherhoods.
The unskilled were less organized, and some major industries, like steel and automobiles, held out against unions until the 1930s.
In 1920, only 9 million of the 25 million industrial workers belonged to a union.
The use of the courts to end a railroad strike in 1922 ushered in a lean period for the unions.
Big business remained dominant in the economy — so long as prosperity continued.
(3) Prosperity in the 1920s
Every business indicator of these years showed the same trend upwards.
The value of stocks and shares, production figures, profits, savings, life insurance, investment and building loans all increased.
Unemployment remained low.
Average "real wages" (what the wages would actually buy) rose by 26% between 1919 and 1929.
Hours of work decreased and in some industries holidays with pay were introduced.
Not everyone shared in the boom; in particular the farmers did not.
But the majority of Americans enjoyed the highest standard of living the world had ever seen.
The Republicans claimed the credit for "Coolidge Prosperity" — and government policies certainly helped to stimulate investment in industry.
However, the real foundations of prosperity lay elsewhere.
Great technical changes, stimulated by wartime demand, led to increased production.
Mass production had begun with the installation by Henry Ford of the moving production line at his Highland Park plant.
Previously it had taken Ford 14 hours to assemble a car; now it took 93 minutes.
Electricity, hardly out of its infancy in 1900, had become the major source of power for what has been called "America's second industrial revolution" .
The Americans adapted their machinery to electric power far more rapidly than any other nation.
Existing industries expanded in leaps and bounds.
As more oilfields were discovered, petroleum products increased by more than 16 times in the 1920s.
The war had stimulated the chemical industry and the related synthetic textile industries.
Rayon and celanese (artificial silk) became the basis of the latter; bakelite, widely used in the radio and electrical industries, heralded the arrival of plastics; cellophane provided a hygienic transparent wrapping material.
New entertainment industries flourished, above all radio and the "movies" (pp. 10–13).
Gadgets for the home and office multiplied fast: among them were refrigerators, vacuum cleaners, typewriters and telephones — the last increasing from 1 355 000 in 1900 to 20 200 000 in 1930.
After the restriction of war time, building resumed at an accelerated rate.
Cities changed in appearance as they vied in creating huge "skyscraper" blocks.
New York grew upwards in spectacular fashion, the climax being the 86-storey Empire State Building (1931).
Suburbs sprawled out to provide homes for the newly prosperous who were searching for more peaceful surroundings.
New areas were opened up by speculative building programmes.
The Florida land boom, based on the possibilities of the are around Miami as a holiday resort, ended in temporary disaster when a hurricane devastated much of the state in 1926.
There was a direct link between the construction industry and the automobile industry, as the 1920s saw the building of a network of highways  throughout the nation.
The great American love affair with the automobile had begun.
American car output rose from 4000 cars per annum in 1900 to 4 800 000 in 1929.
In 1929 one American in five owned a car, compared with one in 43 in Britain.
Three major companies were then producing 83% of American cars: Ford, General Motors and, the most recent, Chrysler.
Henry Ford, who had been building motor cars since the 1890s, led the field.
Through mass production, he steadily lowered the price of his famous Model T ($1500 in 1913, $760 in 1929, $600 in 1929), while a larger volume of sales kept his profit high.
A legendary figure, he was something of a benevolent despot: he steadfastly refused to allow labor unions in his factories, but paid his workers a wage above the national average.
The automobile industry helped to boost a host of other industries, with its demand for steel, rubber, plate glass, leather and textiles.
A range of service industries arose: filling stations, roadside hotels, hot-dog stands, the tourist trade.
Produce could be moved more rapidly and in a fresher state by truck.
In a real sense, the internal combustion engine revolutionized American society in the 1920s.
Mass production meant finding new methods of selling, and manufacturers like Ford encouraged high pressure salesmanship.
Advertising became a large-scale industry in itself, using billboards along the new highways, commercial "breaks" on the radio and in the cinema, and mass circulation newspapers and magazines.
By 1927, $1500 million was spent on advertising.
When cash ran out, there was credit, and the 1920s saw the development of credit by hire-purchase, or buying by instalments.
The continuation of prosperity meant the creation of the desire, and of the means, to consume more and more.
(4) American Society in the 1920s
In the post-war decade, the lives of Americans changed rapidly.
Some of the changes stemmed directly from the wartime period, others from the greater material prosperity of the 1920s.
One clear change was in the status of women.
Having achieved the right to vote through the 19th Amendment to the Constitution, agreed in 1920, they were determined to gain social and economic freedom.
The freer society of the 1920s was symbolized by the "flapper" , the emancipated young women of Scott Fitzgerald novels such as The Great Gatsby and The Beautiful and the Damned.
Short-skirted and heavily made-up, she smoked and drank and behaved in a way that outraged many of the older generation.
As Fitzgerald said in This Side of Paradise, "None of the Victorian mothers had any idea how casually their daughters were accustomed to being kissed." 
Family life for many appeared to be disintegrating as divorce rates rose: from 100 000 per annum in 1914 to 205 000 in 1929.
But while women voted, went out to work, owned more property and enjoyed greater freedom, few reached positions of real power either in politics or in business.
The moral decline which older people detected in the 1920s was blamed by some on the new mass entertainment, especially on the "movies" .
Sex symbols such as Clara Bow, the "It" girl, and Rudolph Valentino, the heart throb "star" of the Sheik, attracted huge audiences to the cinema.
Among the   pioneer film companies, one of the best was United Artists.
Founded by the producer D.W. Griffith, its "stars" included Mary Pickford, Douglas Fairbanks and Charlie Chaplin.
Hollywood became big business as the cinema audiences grew, from an average of 40 million a week in 1922, to 95 million in 1929.
The arrival of the "talkies" in 1927 aroused new interested when millions flocked to watch and hear the first talkie star, Al Jolson, in The Jazz Singer.
There was widespread concern about the effect of the movies and over 30 states began to draft censorship bills.
The industry met this threat in 1922 by appointing its own censor, Harding's former Postmaster-General, Will Hays.
Soon the "Hays Office" was issuing elaborate rules designed to maintain moral standards on the screen.
It is difficult to assess the real effects of the "movies" .
Certainly they gave foreign audiences a distorted view of American life.
Probably their main effect was to offer a form of escapism from everyday life.
The second great new agent of mass communication was the radio.
From  local origins — Station KDKA in Pittsburgh — the transmission of radio broadcasts grew to the first national network, the National Broadcasting Company (NBC) of 1926, closely followed by the Columbia Broadcasting Company (CBC) in 1927.
Unlike British broadcasting, radio was from the start in the hands of commercial companies, with its programmes frequently punctuated by advertisements.
The only Federal control was exercised by the Federal Radio Commission, set up in 1927, with authority to license companies and assign wavelengths.
Radio brought entertainment to a mass audience, in particular light musical entertainment: it produced the age of the great dance bands.
Variety artists from the declining vaudeville theatres found new careers, and cinemas interrupted their programmes to relay the "Amos'n Andy" comic show rather than those their audiences!
More seriously, politicians were soon to realize the value of radio and bought air-time to put over their views.
Thanks to the automobile the Americans soon had a freedom of movement previously unknown.
They could live in pleasant suburbs and travel to work; they could take off to previously distant areas for their holidays.
The isolation of rural areas could now be overcome.
The criminal seized on the new opportunity for a quick get-away across state boundaries.
Surprisingly, in a society fascinated by technology, the aeroplane made slow progress.
But pioneer aviators stimulated interest.
In 1926 Lt Commander Richard Byrd flew from Spitzbergen to the North Pole and back in 16 hours.
Yet it was the solo flight of Charles A Lindbergh in 1927 which really captured the imagination of the American public.
He received a hero's welcome after flying his monoplane, Spirit of St Louis, from New York non-stop to Paris in 33½ hours.
As Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover saw the commercial possibilities of air flight before most of his contemporaries and, under his guidance, Congress passed an Air Commerce Act (1926).
This led, amongst other things, to the use of airlines for carrying the mail.
The American people, struggling to adjust to mew ways of thought and to a novel technology, also faced a different sort of experiment in Federal government regulation of their drinking habits.
The 18th Amendment (1919) had introduced nationwide prohibition.
After a long campaign by "dry" organizations like the Anti-Saloon League (founded 1895) and after wartime pressures for sobriety and wartime hostility to the brewers, who were mostly of German descent, three-quarters of the states had supported the Amendment.
It totally forbade the manufacture, sale and transportation of alcoholic beverages.
The law was to be enforced through the Volstead Act (1919) which defined the "beverages" as those containing more than 0.5% alcohol.
The attempt to legislate on what was essentially moral behaviour proved a disaster, though it lasted until reversed by the 21st Amendment in 1933.
Enforcement of prohibition was an impossible task as "speak easies" (illegal drinking places) mushroomed and an absurdly small force of ill-paid Federal agents tried to discover and close them down.
A vast new illegal industry came into being to cater for the continuing thirst of the nation.
Illicit stills flourished, smugglers and "rum-runners" brought in alcohol from over the borders, and "bootleggers" distributed the liquor.
It was an additional area of activity for the "gangster" to add to his already flourishing "business" operations.
For the 20s were the heyday of the gangster in the cities like Chicago  where, after a series of killings and gang battles, "scarface" Al Capone emerged as "boss" .
He made a fortune from a variety of "rackets" , aided by the corruption of the city authorities that spread from the Mayor, "Bill Bill" Thompson, down to the policemen on the beat.
By 1927, Capone's business operations were worth $60 million.
He drove through the city in an armoured car, and in one area of Chicago there were 130 gang murders in one year.
When the law finally did catch up with Capone in 1931, it was for tax evasion, and he was sentenced to 11 years in prison.
Divisions of opinion over Prohibition reflected a broader tension in American society of the 1920s.
Its supporters, "the drys" , were especially strong in rural, small-town America, while the opponents, "the wets" , drew their largest following from the cities.
To many Americans, the cities seemed the cause of the nation's ills and of the decline of older national values.
The cities were brash, corrupt, and the centres of organized crime.
They also attracted the bulk of the immigrants.
Prejudice against the foreign-born had grown during the war and continued with the "Red Scare" of 1919.
The case of Sacco and Vanzetti provided a notable example.
In a payroll robbery at a shoe factory in South Braintree, Massachusetts, the paymaster and his guard were killed.
Sacco, a factory worker, and Vanzetti, a fish pedlar, were arrested for the murder.
Poor Italian immigrants, who believed in anarchist ideas, they both protested their innocence at their trial.
The evidence against them was inconclusive but they were sentenced to death.
Public attention in the case grew, and many believed that the two men were unfairly tried; the judge had shown a contempt for foreigners and their anarchist background had clearly counted against them.
A world-wide protest movement tried to prevent their execution, but they eventually went to the electric chair in 1927.
Many believed that they were victims of prejudice.
For many Americans, the ideal citizen was the white, Anglo-Saxon protestant (WASP).
They feared that if the flood of immigrants continued, American values would be lost.
Immigration control had for long been  advocated and in 1917, under pressure of war, an Immigration Act was passed forbidding the entry of aliens over 16 years of age who were unable to read a 40-word passage.
In 1921, the Emergency Quota Act was the first to impose a numerical restriction on immigrants.
It set a total of 357 000 immigrants in any one year; and each nationality was given a quota, fixed at 35% of the foreign-born of that nationality resident in American in 1910.
The 1924 National Origins Act reduced the total to 150 000 and re-adjusted the quotas to each nationality in proportion to its numbers in the existing population.
This remained the basis for immigration policy until 1965.
Some nations, like Great Britain, with a large quota, did not take up all their places, while others, like Italy, had a waiting list.
A sign of the native American prejudice against foreign groups was the revival of the Ku-Klux-Klan (KKK) in the 1920s.
Originally founded as an anti-negro secret society in the years after the Civil War, the Klan spread rapidly in the 1920s, not only in the South but also in mid- and far-West.
Its targets now included Jews, Catholics and aliens in general as well as negroes.
The vogue of the Klan lasted for a relatively short time, but at its height, it may have had five million members.
Its elaborate ritual and its uniform of white hooded sheets appealed particularly to poorer folk from the small towns and rural areas who were missing out on the prosperity of the period.
Scandals involving leading members helped to discredit it by 1925.
Those who saw rural values being challenged by modern urban ideas found another cause to support in 1925.
The state of Tennessee had passed a law forbidding the teaching of the theory of evolution on the ground that it "denies the story of the divine creation of man as taught in the Bible" .
John T. Scopes, a biology teacher at the Central High School in Dayton, decided to test the law, and gave his pupils a lecture on evolution.
In the dramatic trial that followed — the so-called "Monkey Trial" — the literal view of the Bible was put forward by the chief prosecution witness, William Jennings Bryan, presidential candidate for the Progressive Party in the 1896 election and later Wilson's Secretary of State.
The defence, led by a brilliant layer and admitted atheist, Clarence Darrow, made Bryan appear a ridiculous figure from the past.
Scopes had broken the law and so lost his case, but many Americans believed that Darrow had won a moral victory.
Such arguments over values, political or religious, were to go on into the next decade.
In the 1920s America had witnessed some of the problems of the modern world that was emerging after the First World War; the confusions and uncertainties that revealed themselves became more acute as prosperity suddenly came to an end in 1929.
(5) Isolationism: Foreign Policy in the 1920s
Historians, looking for a label to describe American foreign policy in the 1920s, have often used the word "isolationism" .
In some ways it is a useful term, for it suggests, correctly, that the USA avoided any "entangling alliances" with other powers, and remained outside the new League of Nations.
Certainly there is a marked contrast with her deep involvement in world affairs after 1945 (p. 58).
Yet if isolationism is taken to mean that the USA tried to cut all ties with other nations — to withdraw into "fortress  America" — then it is far from accurate.
The USA, which had emerged as the most powerful nation in the world after the First World War, played an important role in the post-war world.
The Republicans themselves, in spite of their opposition to the League, recognized this by appointing strong Secretaries of State like Charles Evans Hughes and Henry Stimson.
For the Washington government could not avoid considerable contact with the European powers after 1920.
This was in part a legacy of the war.
The wartime allies of the USA, especially Britain and France, owed her vast sums of money, borrowed during the war for reconstruction after it.
By 1920 these War Debts had reached some $10 000 million.
European attempts to reduce or cancel the debts met with American refusal — "They hired the money, didn't they?" said President Coolidge.
In 1923 the USA and Britain reached an agreement for repayment of debts over a 62-year period at 3.3% interest.
But Britain, like the other European powers, found US tariffs so high that it was impossible to repay in goods.
Gold, an alternative means of payment, was in short supply.
Another way in which the European Allies might find the money was to use German reparations payments (CORE, pp. 5–6).
But their efforts to collect the money from Germany met with little success; and when French and Belgian troops occupied the Ruhr in 1923 in an attempt to force payment, the German economy collapsed amidst wild inflation (CORE, pp. 6–7).
It was the intervention of the USA that saved the situation.
The Americans felt they could not stand by and let Europe fall into economic chaos; their own economy would also suffer.
A committee, chaired by the American Vice-President, Charles G. Dawes, devised a plan in 1924 whereby the German currency was revalued on the basis of American loans, and a revised scheme of reparations was drawn up.
In 1929 another American-led committee, the Young Committee, produced yet another scheme for reparations payments.
The result of these plans was in a sense absurd.
For the Germans, in effect, borrowed American money to pay reparations to the Allies, who used these to pay back interest on their War Debts to the USA.
Yet it illustrated the fact that the United States could not remain completely isolated from Europe.
Her own prosperity depended to some degree on providing loans to stimulate overseas economies in which her own products could be sold.
The interest of the USA in the affairs of Latin America (pp. 143 ff) and the Far East was never in doubt during the so-called isolationist period.
Long-standing commercial interests in the Pacific and the Far East had led her to acquire naval bases in Hawaii and the Philippine Islands (annexed in 1898) along with a stake in the China trade.
During the 1920s American opinion was worried by the increasing power of Japan in the Far East, coupled with the continuing weakness of the Chinese government.
Under American pressure, a naval disarmament conference met in Washington in 1921, attended by all the great powers with interests in the Far East except Bolshevik Russia, which was deliberately ignored.
Charles Evans Hughes, opening the Conference, made a dramatic plea for disarmament and supported it with a detailed plan.
The momentum was sustained and three agreements were reached.
In the Four-Power Treaty, signed by the USA, Britain, Japan and France, each power agreed to recognize the  rights of the others in their Pacific island possessions.
A Five-Power Treaty (signed by the Four and Italy) defined respective naval strengths.
No battleships were to be built for 10 years; and the total tonnage of naval ships was to be based on a ratio of 5-5-3 for the USA, Great Britain and Japan, and 1.7 for each of the others.
Finally, all the powers present signed a Nine-Power Treaty which guaranteed the independence of China and the principle of the "open door" in trade with that country.
The "open door" policy had been devised by the USA in 1900 to prevent any one power dominating the weak Chinese government.
One major American aim at the conference had been to limit the power of the Japanese, who since their victories over China in 1895 and over Russia in 1905, had made increasing demands on China.
At the same time, the USA was anxious at least to keep equality with Britain in the area.
These aims appeared, for the moment, to have been achieved.
Moreover, the strong disarmament movement in the USA had gained some satisfaction from the Five-Power Treaty.
All in all the conference was acclaimed as a considerable success.
The Republicans had committed themselves in 1920 to remaining outside the League of Nations, and there was no serious attempt to reverse this policy subsequently.
A proposal in 1923 to join the judicial arm of the League — the World Court — did, however, gain considerable support, including that of Secretary of State Hughes, and of President Coolidge himself.
But the Senate in the end rejected the move.
Nonetheless, world peace remained a broad American objective, and in 1928 after negotiations between the USA and France (who hoped to draw America more closely into European affairs), Frank Kellogg, the American Secretary of State, and Briand, the French Foreign Minister, signed, along with 13 other powers, the "Kellogg-Briand Pact" (The Pact of Paris)(CORE, p. 9).
All the signatories — who eventually numbered 64 — renounced war "as an instrument of policy" and agreed to solve all disputes by "pacific means" .
The Pact did not provide any machinery for enforcement: it merely pledged the nations to outlaw war.
In this it met with the approval of the US Senate, as it avoided committing the USA to any action overseas, while answering the great yearning of the American people for peace in the world.
3 Hoover and the Great Depression (1929–33)
(1) The Wall Street Crash, 1929
When Coolidge declined to run for a further term in 1928, the Republicans chose as their candidate one of the most distinguished members of their administrations in the 1920s, Herbert Hoover.
An able and highly successful mining engineer, he had also show outstanding ability and humanity in organizing relief for war-stricken Europe in 1919.
As Secretary of Commerce under Harding and Coolidge he was popular in business circles.
he had risen from humble beginnings to great wealth to become that legendary favourite of American politics, the poor farm boy who made good.
With continuing prosperity, the task of the Democrats was immense.
They chose their most notable candidate of the 1920s, Alfred E. Smith, Governor of New York State.
He, too, had risen from humble origins, from a tenement on New York's east side, and had built up a great reputation as a reformer.
He was very much the product of the city — even down to his brown derby hat — and on Prohibition he was a "wet" .
He was also a Roman Catholic, which in the intolerant atmosphere of the 1920s was a distinct disadvantage.
The "happy warrior" , as Al Smith was nicknamed, ran a lively campaign, but his appeal lay mainly in the cities.
Rural America, generally "dry" and often anti-Catholic, rejected him; and Hoover carried 40 states to Smith's eight, with a popular vote of 21.4 million to 15 million.
Even the South, traditionally Democrat since the Civil War, deserted Smith in large part.
One significant, though at the time little noticed, change in voting was the swing to the Democrats in the big cities.
In 1920 and 1924 the 12 largest cities had voted Republican; in 1928 Al Smith won them all.
Hoover's optimism about the future of the USA had been underlined by the words he used on accepting nomination We in America today are nearer the final triumph over poverty than ever before in the history of any land.
That optimism was misplaced.
Eight months after Hoover's inauguration came the Wall Street Crash in October 1929.
Panic struck the New York stock market, share values fell dramatically and Hoover found himself presiding over the worst economic depression in the history of the USA.
What had gone wrong?
A boom had begun on the stock market in 1925, based on genuine prosperity.
As the profits of the great corporations grew, so the value of their shares went up, with more people competing to buy them.
If ready cash was not available, it was easy to borrow money because interest rates were low and banks eager to lend to potential investors.
Share  prices began to rise steeply in 1927 as people with money to spare increasingly saw the stock market as a gambling casino rather than as a business centre.
Speculation now had little to do with the real progress of companies: the buying and selling of shares had become an end in itself.
1928 saw what one writer has called "a mass escape into make-believe" : within months shares trebled in value.
The daily volume of business reached ever new heights during the year over 920 million shares were traded, compared with 576 million in 1927, as more and more people came to believe they could get rich quickly.
It is estimated that up to one million Americans invested in shares — from millionaires to the ordinary man and woman in the street.
Millions more watched the fortunes of companies with the fascination usually reserved for their favourite baseball teams.
No one is absolutely certain of the reasons for the collapse, yet it only needed a sudden fear that share prices would drop to produce panic.
In September 1929 prices began to fall, and then recovered; but late in October came a further fall in prices which heralded the crash.
On Thursday 24 October, nearly 13 million shares were sold; on Tuesday 29 October, 16.5 million.
Between September and December 1929 share values fell by some $40 000 million, and this time there was no recovery.
In 1929 US steel shares stood at $262, and in 1932 at $22; likewise General Motors fell from $73 to $8.
The Wall Street Crash did not simply create havoc and ruin for stock market investors.
It also helped produce a real economic collapse, the "Great Depression" , for the all-important factor of business confidence was removed.
Investment no longer flowed into manufacturing companies, which in turn cut back production.
Now the weaknesses in the American economy, so well hidden by the prosperity of the 1920s, became only too clear.
One of these weaknesses lay in unsound business practices.
Business had thrived in the freedom of the 1920s, yet many of its methods and customs led to disaster.
Many banks, for example, lacked proper reserves and lent money far too easily to finance the stock market speculation.
In 1929, 650 banks went bankrupt; by 1933, some 4000 had collapsed.
Likewise large business corporations were often badly structured and sometimes plainly fraudulent.
A second, and deeper, cause of the depression was that too much of the income from the prosperous 20s was going into too few hands.
By 1929, 5% of the American population were getting 33% of all personal income.
With Mellon's tax reliefs, the rich were getting very much richer.
While this income was being spent or invested, all might be well.
But there was a limit to what this small group could consume, and even before the Crash consumer spending was slowing down.
What was needed was a wider distribution of the profits of industry, especially through higher wages.
Many wage earners were indeed better off than ever before, and after 1922 the economy was free from inflation.
But the American economy depended a great deal on mass consumption — and higher wages would have enabled that consumption to continue to increase.
Thirdly, there were some large groups of Americans who were unable to join the consumer boom.
Agriculture, in the 1920s still the occupation of 27% of Americans, suffered a depression throughout the decade.
Here the  problem lay in too much produce rather than too little, and in the low prices farmers received in these conditions of glut.
Farm income slumped from 16% of national income in 1919 to 9% in 1929.
To most people in the rural areas a car and a radio, and even electric power, remained luxuries they could not afford.
In regions like West Virginia, Kentucky and parts of New England, ageing coal or woollen textile industries had declined, wages were low and unemployment high.
Fourthly, a great potential outlet for American goods, the overseas market, also failed to provide sufficient demand.
American exports only rose by 38% between 1922 and 1929, while the rate of manufacturing rose by 50%.
Restrictions on international trade, such as tariffs, were in part responsible for this — and the USA had herself encouraged such restrictions by her own high tariff policy.
Moreover, when depression did come, a great deal of the money invested overseas by the government and private speculators — for example in Germany — was lost as the economic problems spread worldwide (CORE, pp. 9–12).
(2) Hoover and the Great Depression
The Hoover administration was unfortunate in having to face an economic crisis of unparalleled severity.
The figures in the table below show how grim the situation was.
Unemployment rose dramatically, while the manufacturing industry declined steeply, producing in 1932 only just over half its output in 1929.   wheat fell from $1.05 a bushel in 1929 to 39 cents in 1932, and similar falls occurred for most other agricultural products.
The value of foreign trade fell from $10 000 million in 1929 to $3000 million in 1932.
The depression spread across class lines: bank clerks, graduates from the universities, teachers and other members of the middle class faced the horrors of unemployment along with the industrial worker and the farm labourer.
Savings disappeared, mortgage payments could no longer be kept up, purchases made on instalment plans had to be returned.
Soup kitchens were opened to feed the destitute; in Chicago people waited at the back doors of restaurants for left-over food.
Some, rather than beg, took to the streets in New York to sell apples.
Shanty towns made of waste materials were built on the outskirts of cities, and bitterly called "Hoovervilles" .
Hoover faced a terrible dilemma.
Like his fellow Republicans he believed that government should interfere as little as possible in the economy.
His personal philosophy was a belief in the great virtue of individual effort: in "rugged individualism" .
In the early stages of the Depression he relied on optimistic statements to keep people's spirits up — "prosperity is just around the corner" he said in 1930 — and on gaining the voluntary co-operation of business leaders in maintaining employment and wages.
He genuinely believed that the economy was fundamentally sound and that the Depression would pass.
But as the economies of other countries around the world began to collapse, it became increasingly clear that the Depression was no brief passing phase.
Attempts to protect the American economy by raising tariff rates, as in the Hawley-Smoot tariff of 1930, led only to retaliation by other countries against American goods.
For world trade was in serious decline and even the belated one-year moratorium on foreign debt payments, announced by Hoover in 1931, failed to revive the ailing economies of Europe.
As businessmen proved unable to bring about industrial recovery, Hoover's administration reluctantly entered the arena.
Public works were promoted by Federal funds: roads and public buildings were constructed, parks and forests extended, and a massive dam project — the Boulder (later Hoover) Dam — was begun in 1930.
In 1932 a further step towards government intervention in the economy was taken when the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) was established.
This lent money to banks, insurance companies, agricultural credit institutions and railroads.
The initial loan of $1 500 000 were later increased to $3 300 000.
Agriculture received help through the Federal Farm Board, set up (before the Crash) by the Agricultural Marketing Act of 1929.
Surplus crops in wheat, cotton and wool were bought up by government-financed Stabilization Corporations, in an attempt to keep up prices in these commodities.
The use of Federal powers and Federal money was unprecedented.
But it was still not enough to overcome the crisis, and it is difficult to quarrel with the verdict of many of Hoover's critics — "too little, too late" .
For the unemployed and their families struggling on the edge of starvation and of eviction from their homes, the great failure of the Hoover administration was its consistent opposition to the provision of Federal relief.
The USA had no system of social security against the ravages of sickness or unemployment — no "dole" as in Britain, on which people could fall back in  bad times.
Many in business circles still held the belief that unemployment was the result of idleness or inefficiency.
Hoover, himself, certainly not a callous man, considered that it would be fatal for the Federal government to take over in the field of relief, which was properly the concern of state and local governments with help from private charity.
In 1931 he stated: the moment the responsibilities of any community, particularly in the field of social and economic questions, are shifted from any part of the nation to Washington, then that community has subjected itself to a remote bureaucracy.
It has lost a large part of its voice in the control of its own destiny.
But state and local funds, like those of the charities, were simply not adequate for the provision of relief.
By 1932 more than 100 cities had no money left.
An air of helplessness and despair spread about, punctuated by stirrings of an uglier mood.
In the rural areas, angry farmers prevented officials from evicting those who were in arrears with their mortgage payments.
The discontent was brought into the capital by the arrival in 1932 of some 15 000 unemployed "Veterans" (i.e. men who had seen army service in the  First World War).
They demanded the immediate payment of the bonus promised to them by the government, but not payable until 1945.
When Congress refused to enact a Bonus Bill, many of this "Bonus Expeditionary Force" camped on the Anacostia mud flats, constructing a shanty town.
Eventually the Washington authorities requested the help of the army in clearing the site.
In July 1932 a military force was dispatched under the Army Chief of Staff, Douglas MacArthur, accompanied by his aide, Major Dwight Eisenhower.
The veterans were dispersed, their homes burned and their camp destroyed.
The whole incident had been exaggerated with talk of a threat to the institutions of government, and many saw it as a further example of the insensitivity of the Republican administration to the human sufferings of the period.
The presidential election that November would enable the people of the USA to pass a harsh verdict on the increasingly unpopular Hoover government.
4 F.D. Roosevelt and the New Deal
(1) Franklin Delano Roosevelt
In the 1932 election campaign, Hoover's gloomy performance seemed to reflect the steadily worsening economic situation.
By contrast, the Democratic candidate, Franklin D. Roosevelt, radiating confidence and optimism, showed his positive enjoyment of the political battle.
His enthusiasm communicated itself to the voters who responded eagerly to his promise of a "New Deal" , and he polled 22 million votes to Hoover's 15 million, carrying 42 out of 48 states.
In Congress, the Democrats won sweeping majorities in both Senate and House of Representatives.
In 1932 a journalist wrote of Roosevelt: He is a pleasant man who, without any important qualifications for the office, would very much like to be President.
The journalist, attracted by Roosevelt's easy charm, had failed to detect the underlying strength of character and iron determination that were clearly revealed in his 13 years as president.
He also underestimated the new President's qualifications.
Born in 1882, Roosevelt came from an old-established and well-to-do landowning family of upstate New York.
He had the education of the privileged — private school followed by Harvard University and then law school.
But his interest soon turned to politics, and in 1910 he entered the New York State Senate.
A Democrat, unlike his famous cousin, the Republican ex-President Theodore Roosevelt, Franklin moved on to the national political scene as Assistant Secretary of the Navy in Woodrow Wilson's administration in 1913.
He was the defeated vice-presidential candidate in the 1920 election.
The following year he contracted polio.
He showed immense physical courage in fighting the illness which left him unable to walk again unaided.
His struggle to regain fitness may well have contributed to his later confidence and optimism in facing the problems of the 1930s.
As an acquaintance wrote later: Have fought and won the hardest fight of all, why should he fear anything a human foe or fate itself could threaten?
He returned to politics in the mid-1920s, backed Al Smith in 1928 and succeeded him as Governor of New York.
This experience, working at state level in face of the Depression from 1929, was invaluable.
His programmes to help the unemployed, to improve working conditions and to aid agriculture established his reputation as a reformer and provided a foretaste of the New Deal.
To aid his election campaign, Roosevelt had gathered together a body of men and women who became known as his Brain Trust, mostly from the universities.
These people, along with experts from the business and agricultural worlds, economists, social reformers and progressive politicians, helped Roosevelt to shape the New Deal.
Just as important as expert advice was the new President's ability to explain his policies to the American people in simple, homely terms.
In "fireside chats" over the radio, he spoke to people in their own homes in phrases they could easily understand.
He made it clear that he was prepared to use the power of the government to its fullest extent to provide what he regarded as everyone's right — "the right to a comfortable living" .
He gave hope of improvement for millions when he spoke of the plight of "the forgotten man at the bottom of the economic pyramid" .
Once in the White House he assembled a strong Cabinet.
Frances Perkins, the first woman to achieve cabinet rank, was his Secretary of Labor; Harold Ickes, a veteran reformer, was Secretary of the Interior; Henry Wallace, farm expert, was the Secretary of Agriculture.
Close to the President for most of the New Deal years was Harry Hopkins who worked as Federal relief administrator.
These people and a host of others provided ideas and helped to put them into effect; the guiding hand and political boss was Franklin Roosevelt himself.
The expression "New Deal" was first used by Roosevelt in his speech accepting the Democratic Party nomination as its presidential candidate in July 1932, when he said "I pledge you, I pledge myself to a new deal for the American people." 
It was a happy phrase which made people feel better, and it caught on at once; and it has remained as a convenient label to cover the series of domestic reforms which the Roosevelt administration introduced between 1933 and 1938.
This was certainly not a logically-planned programme, and its various measures do not fit into neat compartments.
Roosevelt promised "bold persistent experimentation" , and he emphasized the pre-eminent role of the Federal government in what he had to offer.
So in his first inaugural address (March 1933) he asked Congress for "broad executive power to wage a war against the emergency" .
This power, however, was to be used according to the rules of the American Constitution, not as a means to a dictatorship like that which Hitler was setting up at the very same time in Germany.
Roosevelt correctly saw the verdict of the election as reform rather than revolution.
The major tasks that he tackled in the New Deal were, first, to provide the relief for the victims of the Depression; second, to promote the recovery of the American economy on a permanent basis; and third, to remove through reform the inequalities of American society.
The measures to fulfil these three aims came in two main batches: in the frantic activity of the "First Hundred Days" from March to June 1933, and in a second burst of legislation in 1935.
(2) The First Hundred Days, March-June 1933
On taking power in March, 1933, Roosevelt faced an immediate crisis.
The weak banking structure of the USA was in imminent danger of collapse.
As customers panicked and tried to withdraw their savings, banks began to close their doors.
Roosevelt ordered a "bank holiday" and delivered one of his "fireside chats" .
His promise that only soundly financed banks would be allowed to open restored confidence, and the immediate crisis passed.
A Banking Act (June 1933), setting up a federal corporation to insure bank deposits, was one of several reforms aimed to tighten up business practices.
The Securities Act (1933) attempted to regulate the financiers of the Wall Street stock market.
It required the full disclosure of the condition of any firm wishing to issue new shares.
This control was extended in the Securities Exchange Act (1934), which set up a new regulatory body, the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC).
But the central issue of the early New Deal was the problem of industrial and agricultural recovery.
Some of the President's advisers on industrial recovery wanted a national plan, with the Federal government in command; others wanted business and government to work out a scheme of co-operation on a voluntary basis.
Another view was that business had grown too powerful and that the government should break up large firms ( "trust busting" ).
The act which emerged in 1933 — the National Industrial Recovery Act — attempted planning on a voluntary basis.
The first part of the act set up a National Industrial Recovery Administration (NIRA).
This was to draw up "codes" of fair competition for each section of industry, starting with the giants like iron and steel, automobiles, textiles, oil and coal.
For the businessmen the codes offered the means to regulate levels of production and prices.
For the workers they provided clauses establishing minimum wages, maximum hours and better working conditions; and Section 7a of the act gave workers the right to organize and to bargain through representatives of their own choice.
The system depended on voluntary co-operation and the speed with which it was adopted owed much to the enthusiasm — and bullying — of the first chief of NIRA, General Hugh Johnson.
Over 500 codes were established by the end of 1933.
Buyers were urged to boycott firms which refused to join in by looking for products that bore the NIRA badge: a Blue Eagle with the motto, "We Do Our Part" .
The results of the scheme were mixed.
It helped to maintain levels of production and to prevent price-cutting wars which led to further bankruptcies and so to further unemployment.
Socially it led to considerable gains: many of the codes, for example, contained clauses forbidding child labour, an evil never before tackled on a national scale.
But the large firms dominated the code authorities, leading to complaints that the price-fixing arrangements were being used to force the smaller firms out of business.
These large firms were also finding ways of avoiding the labour clauses.
The NIRA generated new enthusiasm and confidence, but it did not really bring the hoped-for economic recovery.
When in the "sick Chicken" case of 1935 the Supreme Court ruled against the act, declaring Federal code-making an unconstitutional interference with the authority of the separate states, Roosevelt made no attempt to revive it in a new form.
The second part of the same act established a Public Works Administration (PWA) with £3.3 billion to spend on heavy construction projects, in an effort to provide the unemployed with jobs.
The projects were to be of real and lasting value, and able in the long run to pay for themselves.
Harold Ickes, who took charge, was anxious to avoid waste or corruption and moved very cautiously.
By the end of 1933 he had spent only $113 million and provided jobs for about one million.
The PWA went on to achieve an impressive record in building schools, civic buildings and hospitals, but more rapid and extensive programmes of public works were required to provide relief for the millions who remained unemployed.
The New Deal showed great ingenuity in designing public works schemes.
The Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA), headed by Harry Hopkins, had a budget of half a billion dollars to distribute to the states.
Americans preferred the provision of work to "hand outs" and FERA began to sponsor "make work" projects.
To provide immediate employment for young men between 18 and 25, the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) was set up in March 1933.
Living in camps, they carried out conservation work, planting new forests and helping with flood control projects.
Over the nine years of its existence, the CCC provided work for 2.5 million young men.
The slow progress of PWA led Roosevelt to set up a large-scale temporary relief agency, the Civil Works Administration (CWA), to see the nation through the winter.
With great speed, the CWA created jobs for over  4 million Americans, constructing new highways, airports and schools before it ended in April 1934.
Roosevelt's main aim remained the recovery of private industry, but he was to find it necessary to stimulate the economy on a number of future occasions through direct government action (pp. 33–4, 35).
Another major task of the Roosevelt administration was to stimulate the revival of agriculture.
The collapse of farm prices after 1929 left the farmers bitterly discontented.
One of their spokesmen warned in January 1933: Unless something is done for the American farmer, we will have revolution in the countryside within less than twelve months.
As Secretary of Agriculture Henry Wallace was under orders to produce rapid legislation, and in May 1933 the Agricultural Adjustment Act was passed.
Its most important section provided for a reduction in agricultural output in order to raise prices.
Farmers were offered benefit payments for taking part of their land out of production, or for reducing the numbers of their livestock.
The payments were financed by processing taxes, imposed, for example, on flour millers and cotton spinners.
The scheme was carried out by the Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA) and the committees were set up at a local level with farmer representatives from the various areas of production, such as wheat, cotton, dairy produce, rice and tobacco.
The first effects of the scheme were the most dramatic.
There was horrified public reaction as millions of acres of land, already sown, were ploughed in and 6 million little pigs were slaughtered.
Such drastic action seemed a heartless waste of resources when thousands of people were on the verge of starvation.
More orderly reductions followed, however, and by 1934 farm prices had begun to increase.
Help in maintaining the prices of agricultural products became a permanent feature of government policy from this time.
When the Supreme Court declared the AAA unconstitutional in 1936, further legislation was passed to continue the programme and in 1938 a   second Agricultural Adjustment Act was passed.
The government also helped the farmers in other ways.
The AAA launched education programmes.
Farmers were assisted in their debts, for example through the Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation, set up in 1934.
It was, however, the larger farming interests which gained most under the AAA and rural poverty — especially among the black population in the South — remained a desperate problem in spite of later attempts to solve it (pp. 34, 35–6).
One of the most exciting projects of the Hundred Days was the establishment of the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) in May 1933.
This brought together a number of the main themes of the New Deal its interest in social and economic planning and in scientific farming and conservation, its campaign for the provision of electrical power in the rural areas, and its concern with the revival of depressed communities.
The TVA operated in a vast impoverished region, about the size of England and Scotland, and containing parts of seven states.
Over half of its 4 500 000 inhabitants, scratching a poor living from land eroded by flooding, were on relief in 1933.
The new agency gave the area a "face lift" , producing and distributing electrical power from the great hydro-electric dams built in the valley Flood prevention schemes were engineered, nitrate fertilizer plants set up, forests planted and private industries encouraged to come into the region.
The inhabitants of the valley were invited to help in the planning of the scheme and health and welfare facilities were provided.
The TVA became a showcase for the New Deal.
(3) The New Deal — The Second Phase, 1934–5
Inevitably, the pace of legislative change slowed down after the hectic activity of the first Hundred Days.
Unemployment remained high and the economy recovered very slowly.
Personally Roosevelt was immensely popular, and in the mid-term elections of November 1934, the Democrats increased their already massive majorities in Congress.
But the first rumblings of serious criticism had started to sound — the honeymoon period was over.
Businessmen, who had generally welcomed the initial actions of the administration, now called for a halt.
In August 1934 they formed a new organization, the Liberty League, to unite opposition to the New Deal.
They accused Roosevelt of moving towards socialism, and of destroying initiative and self-reliance.
It was easy for Roosevelt to dismiss the Liberty League as a small minority of the rich and privileged.
More worrying were the attacks of the radicals and reformers who accused Roosevelt of stopping short of a real change in American life.
The critics who won the most popular support were a strange trio: a Roman Catholic priest, an elderly doctor, and a rabble-rousing southern politician.
Father Coughlin came to fame as the "radio priest" , broadcasting from the altar of his Shrine of the Little Flower near Detroit.
As his broadcasts became increasingly political in content, his earlier support for the New Deal changed to hostility.
His own ideas were confused, but his message — that Roosevelt was failing to achieve social justice — reached the largest radio audience in the world.
Dr Francis Townsend was very specific on policy: he advocated the setting up of a fund, financed by taxation, to provide old age pensions of $200 each month for everyone over 60.
The only conditions were that the person receiving the pension had to retire and agree to spend the money within the month.
Millions of old people joined the Townsend Clubs that sprang up across the nation.
The plan seemed to offer both help for the neglected old and, by creating demand, employment for the younger members of society.
The idea that a re-distribution of wealth could stimulate the economy was at the heart of Huey Long's "share our Wealth" scheme, launched in 1934.
The Senator from Louisiana proposed the taxing of all large incomes to provide every American family with a lump sum of $5000, an income of $2000, a car, a radio, a washing machine and better opportunities for education.
Long, who had become Governor of Louisiana at the age of 34, was an able reforming politician, a brilliant and often hilarious orator, and a ruthless power-seeker.
Roosevelt and his advisers saw Huey Long as a serious political threat, whose support for a third-party candidate in 1936 might split the Democratic vote.
In the event, Long was assassinated in 1935 and, although is supporters combined with those of Coughlin and Townsend in 1936, their Union Party polled less than one million votes.
Pressure for reform also came from the labor unions.
1934 was a year of bitter industrial strife, and in 1935 a giant new union movement arose, the Committee for Industrial Organization (CIO), formed by John L. Lewis of the mineworkers.
The purpose of the CIO was to organize workers in the mass production industries and particularly to bring in unskilled workers, previously without unions.
In 1938 the CIO was to split away from the  old-established American Federation of Labor, for whom it was too militant and too political in its aims.
Roosevelt was finally pushed towards further reforming measures by the decision of the Supreme Court in May 1935, which declared NIRA unconstitutional.
The conservative majority on the Court now appears to be attacking the central core of the New Deal, and the President responded by calling on Congress to pass a series of important new measures.
He placed a strong emphasis on welfare measures, expressing again his concern for the victims of the Depression.
Thus, to battle with the obstinate problem of unemployment, the President called for renewed spending on public works, and in 1935 a Works Progress Administration (WPA) was set up under Harry Hopkins.
The range of its activities was immense: in addition to the building of schools, hospitals, bridges and highways, there were schemes to provide useful employment for writers and artists.
The Federal Theatre Project put on plays, musicals and variety shows across the continent; while the National Youth Administration provided part-time work for college students and vocational training for many other young people.
A landmark in welfare provision was the Social Security Act (1935).
For the first time the Federal government took responsibility for providing, with the co-operation of the states, old age pensions, unemployment benefits and help for such groups as the blind and the handicapped.
Pensions and unemployment payments were based on an insurance scheme, the funds for which  were raised by taxes levied on both workers and employers.
Compared with similar schemes in Europe, the benefits were by no means generous, and many millions remained outside the provisions of the act.
It was, however, probably the best that Roosevelt could hope to achieve politically, and it became the basis of extensions in the post-war years.
More help was provided for the farmer, and particularly for the rural poor.
The Resettlement Administration (RA) attempted to aid destitute farmers trying to scratch a living from exhausted land, as well as the predominantly black sharecroppers of the South.
Though funds were never sufficient to solve the problems completely, some farmers were resettled on better land purchased by the TA and others had their farms re-equipped.
The Rural Electrification Administration brought electric power to farmers on a large scale: the number of farms with electricity rose from 10% before the scheme to 40$ by 1941.
In response to the pressure from the labor unions, the administration decided to support a bill proposed in 1935 by Senator Wagner.
The National Labor Relations Act (often known as the Wagner Act) replaced section 7a of the NIRA by a considerably more effective measure, recognizing the right of workers to organize and bargain collectively.
It forbade a number of unfair practices used by employers to block union development, and set up the National Labor Board to sort out problems and act as "umpire" between labour and management.
Roosevelt felt that the act brought a fairer balance into the field of management-labour relations.
Businessmen were further upset by a series of tax proposals, commonly known as the "soak the rich taxes" , which were aimed at the wealthy and large business corporations.
The Public Utilities Holding Companies Act was also seen as an attack on big business; this gave powers to the Securities Exchange Commission to dissolve the giant holding companies that between them controlled over 90% of the nation's electric power output.
This second great spurt of legislation consolidated Roosevelt's reputation as a reformer and helped to ensure his re-election in 1936.
His measures had welded together an invincible voter coalition.
The urban working class, organized labour and the farmers all supported the Democrats in 1936.
Particular groups the blacks, women, recent immigrants — felt that their special needs were at last getting some attention in Washington, and they too voted for Roosevelt.
The traditional southern support for the Democratic Party was maintained, in spite of the doubts of some of the more conservative southern politicians.
Roosevelt won a landslide victory: he received 28 million votes and won 46 states, to the Republicans"17 million votes and only two states.
The Democratic majorities also further increased in both houses of Congress.
(4) Roosevelt's Second Administration 1937–41
The way now seemed open for a new era of reform, with Roosevelt at the height of his political powers.
But is hopes of a substantial enlargement of the New Deal did not materialize.
This was mainly the result of the action  taken by Roosevelt shortly after his second inauguration: his attempt to reform the Supreme Court.
The President had good reason for trying to reform the Supreme Court.
Its conservative majority seemed to be moving steadily against the New Deal from 1935.
Among other measures, it had struck down the NIRA and the AAA.
The only way to change the Court was to wait for the justices (of whom there were nine) either to die or retire, and appoint replacements who would support the New Deal.
This could have taken years, so the President decided on more drastic action.
He called for new legislation to allow him to appoint a new justice in addition to each one who had reached the age of 70 (up to a limit of six new justices).
Roosevelt announced his plan without warning, and an immediate wave of opposition swept through both the Senate and the House, led by Democrats who normally supported the President.
Combining with the Republicans, they defeated what came to be called "the Court-packing plan" .
There was widespread opposition among the public at large who feared that the move would lead to too great an increase in presidential power.
In one sense, Roosevelt's plan did succeed.
The Supreme Court, taking heed of the warning, began to drop its opposition to the New Deal.
Between March and May 1937, it upheld two key measures, the National Labor Relations Act and the old age pension section of the Social Security Act.
In another way, however, the hastily-drawn up plan was a rare example of political misjudgment by Roosevelt.
He was accused of being dictatorial and of attempting to overthrow the Constitution.
A conservative coalition of Democrat and Republican congressmen developed which could delay further reforms, and sometimes block them altogether.
They found further fuel for their opposition in an outburst of labour unrest in 1937–8.
A series of sit-down strikes forced the giant US Steel Company and General Motors to allow unionization in their plants.
Critics were quick to blame the government for the new levels of strife and violence in labour relations.
Roosevelt was urged by his liberal supporters to use his immense personal popularity to "purge" conservative opponents from within the Democratic Party.
In the run-up to the 1938 election, the President tried to replace a number of conservative southern Senators with candidates more favourable to the New Deal.
This failed, however, and, with the Republicans making significant gains in the 1938 mid-term elections, Roosevelt's political difficulties continued.
The undoubted economic recovery after 1933 also appeared to be coming to a halt in a new recession which began in the summer of 1937.
Unemployment rose from 7.5 million to nearly 10.5 million in 1938 as industrial production slumped.
Businessmen called for economies, but Roosevelt had learnt the lesson of 1929.
His solution was now to spend his way out of the recession by a massive expansion of public works programmes, and by the summer of 1939 the crisis was over — although there were still over 9 million unemployed.
In face of these political and economic problems, the legislative record of the second administration was necessarily limited.
The Housing Act (1937) began a modest scheme to provide loans for low-cost public housing projects.
The second AAA was passed in 1938, and poorer farmers were aided  by the Farm Security Act (1937) which took the place of the RA.
The Fair Labor Standards Act (1938) established a national minimum wage and maximum hours of work, where before there had been only individual state laws.
In 1940 Roosevelt broke with tradition and stood for a third term of office.
His personal appeal to the electors was still very powerful, but the margin of his victory was considerably less than that of 1936.
The issues, however, had changed, as American began to face the grave crisis in international affairs presented by the outbreak of war in Europe in 1939.
(5) The New Deal — a verdict
The New Deal was a complex and highly significant process of change, the effects of which have continued to be felt in American history ever since the 1930s.
If the New Deal is judged by its economic success alone, then the verdict must be a mixed one.
One indicator — unemployment — illustrates this very well.
By 1940, unemployment was nearly 50% less than in 1932; but even in the best pre-war year (1937) one in eight of the labour force was out of work.
Only wartime rearmament from 1940 on was to solve this problem.
But, generally speaking, the economy had by 1937 recovered to the level reached before the Depression started in 1929.
Most significant for the future was the acceptance of the need for the Federal government to be responsible for the general management of the economy.
The New Deal in fact established a far more important role for the Federal Government in a whole range of areas previously considered to be outside its scope.
Roosevelt quite deliberately extended the powers of central government in order to achieve a fairer society that offered its citizens greater security.
Some groups, such as the farmers and the labor unions, now gained a greater share in power and its benefits.
There remained very large groups — such as the blacks and rural poor who still only scraped a living.
Now, however, there was at least a basic system of government-organized welfare, through the relief programmes and social security.
Critics on the left have attacked Roosevelt for not doing enough, and have seen the New Deal as a "missed opportunity" .
Others see as Roosevelt's major achievement his success in steering a liberal middle way between revolution and stagnation, between the political extremes of right and left.
As Roosevelt put it in one of his homely comparisons: Say the New Deal is a tree which, as it grows, continually produces rot and dead wood.
The radical says: "Cut it down" .
The conservation says: "Don't touch it" .
The liberal compromises: "Let's prune, so that we lose neither the old trunk nor the new branches" .
Above all, the USA under Roosevelt's New Deal had met the challenges of world depression without recourse to the excesses of dictatorship experienced by so many millions in Europe during the same years.
5 The United States and the Second World War
(1) The Road to War: Roosevelt and the Neutrality Acts
Franklin Roosevelt came to the White House with some experience of international affairs.
As Under-Secretary of the Navy in Wilson's administration from 1913, he had warmly supported American entry into the First World War, and in 1919 he had wanted the USA to join the League of Nations.
He believed firmly that his country should play an active role in world affairs.
As president, however, he pursued a cautious policy, well aware that the majority of Americans were deeply suspicious of any involvements that might lead them into further wars.
It was essential for him to keep the support of Congress in dealing with the Depression, and Congress in the 1930s was determined to keep out of the overseas conflicts.
These years saw the growth of tension in Europe, with the rise of an aggressive Germany under Hitler, and in the Far East, where Japan was exerting continues pressure on China (CORE, pp. 40–43).
The reaction of Congress was to pass a series of Neutrality Laws between 1935 and 1937.
Americans were forbidden to sell arms and military equipment to countries at war.
Such countries were allowed to buy non-military materials, provided that they paid cash for them and transported them in their own ships (the "cash and carry laws" ).
No loans could be made to countries at war, and American citizens were forbidden to travel on their ships.
Roosevelt objected to these rules, which limited his powers in foreign policy, but he accepted them rather than have a battle with Congress.
As the international situation became more serious, the President began to move cautiously against the idea of complete American neutrality.
In 1937 he expressed alarm about the spread of violence in the world, and spoke of the need for international action to "quarantine" the aggressors.
Beyond appealing for a peaceful settlement of European problems, there was not much that Roosevelt could do, as Hitler successively moved against Austria, Czechoslovakia and finally, Poland, precipitating the Second World War in September 1939.
The President issued a series of neutrality proclamations, yet at the same time he persuaded Congress to extend the "cash and carry" principle to include armaments.
Most Americans wishes to stay out of war, but were prepared to see help given to the enemies of Fascism.
When France fell in June 1940, leaving Britain alone against the threat of German invasion, Roosevelt called for "the extension of the material resources of the nation" to help the people of Britain.
As the election of November 1940 approached, opinion about the war was divided.
The America First Committee was formed, dedicated to keep the  nation out of the war and opposed to any further changes in the Neutrality Laws.
Yet a counter group, the Committee to Defend America by Aiding the Allies, was more in turn with public opinion, which by now supported Roosevelt's policy of all-out aid to Britain.
That September the President made his first significant move to provide military equipment to the British government.
At a time when nearly half of Britain's destroyers had been put out of action, he arranged with Winston Churchill to provide 50 over-age US destroyers in return for the leases on eight British naval bases in the American hemisphere.
Encouraged by victory in the election, Roosevelt persuaded Congress to accept in March 1941 the Lend Lease scheme for supplying military and other goods to any nation whose defence the President considered vital to the United States.
Lend Lease, by-passing the Neutrality Laws, became vital in aiding first Britain, and later the Soviet Union, in their resistance to Hitler.
Congress allows the use of billions of dollars to lend and lease supplies throughout the war period.
This policy means that the USA was moving closer to war.
To enable the supplies to reach their destination, the US Navy began to co-operate with the Royal Navy in convoys across the Atlantic.
When US ships were attacked by German submarines, Roosevelt ordered that they should "shoot on sight" .
American troops were moved to occupy the strategically important bases of Greenland and Iceland, and a state of undeclared war existed in the Atlantic.
A further step towards closer ties with the British came in August 1941, when Churchill and Roosevelt met on the battleship Prince of Wales in Placentia Bay, Newfoundland.
There they issued a joint statement  of war aims, the Atlantic Charter.
Although Roosevelt did not commit the USA to war, the Charter called for the "final destruction of the Nazi tyranny" as well as for the right of all peoples to national self-determination, economic and social freedom, freedom of the seas and ultimate disarmament.
Yet the actual entry of the USA into the war came as the result of a direct attack on the other side of the world.
Relations between the USA and Japan had deteriorated sharply after the successful Japanese occupation in 1931 of the Chinese province of Manchuria; and American concern about the growing power of Japan in the Far East had greatly increased after the invasion of northern China by Japanese armies in 1937 (AA, pp. 22–4).
As military leaders gained influence over Japan's government, so Japanese ambitions for an Asian empire grew.
In September 1940, Japanese forces overran the French colony of Indo-China.
To American eyes it seemed that the whole of South-East Asia was now threatened.
Aid to China was stepped up and the USA began to exert economic pressure on the Japanese, stopping all trade between the two countries by July 1941.
Diplomatic negotiations were still continuing in Washington when, without declaring war, Japanese forces  attacked the American naval base at Pearl Harbor in the Hawaiian Islands on 7 December 1941.
Within two hours eight battleships and over 180 aircraft had been either destroyed or severely damaged, and there were over 3000 casualties.
Fortunately there were no American aircraft carriers at the base.
The news removed all doubts about American entry into the war.
Next day, Congress declared war on Japan; three days later Germany fulfilled her agreement to support Japan, and declared war on the United States.
(2) The War in Europe
Faced with a world war on two fronts, Roosevelt's administration confirmed the fundamental strategy decided upon earlier in 1941 at an Anglo-American military staff conference.
The war in Europe was to take priority over the war in the Pacific, which was to be essentially a "holding operation" .
Although American commanders in the Pacific constantly exerted pressure for greater resources, the decision to deal with Hitler first was not reversed.
Subsequent decisions on strategy concerned the best use of American resources in the European theatre of war, and here the British Prime  Minister, Winston Churchill, played an important role in 1942.
The Russians, fighting desperately to hold back the German invaders, called on the Allies to set up a "second front" in Western Europe by invading France.
Roosevelt, at a meeting in 1942 with the Soviet Foreign Minister, Molotov, half-promised such a move.
Churchill, backed by the military leaders, persuaded the President that it was too soon for a direct assault on Europe, and that in its place there should be an Anglo-American invasion of North Africa (Operation Torch) to link up with the British Army already fighting the Germans and Italians in the Western Desert.
The decision to postpone the Second Front, first to 1843 and then to 1944, was deeply displeasing to the Russians, who felt they were being left to bear the brunt of the fighting against Germany.
So in November 1942, forces under the command of General Dwight D. Eisenhower landed in French North Africa (notably at Casablanca, Oran and Algiers) shortly after the British victory at El Alamein in Egypt.
American troops made up over three quarters of the Allied forces: for the first time American soldiers were fighting their Axis enemies on the ground.
In may 1943, the German and Italian troops in Africa surrendered with the loss of 15 divisions.
The way was open for the invasion of Italy, a strategy which Churchill had advocated when he met Roosevelt at Casablanca in January 1943.
At this conference the President announced that the war would continue until "the unconditional surrender" of Germany, Italy and Japan had been received.
In July 1943 Anglo-American forces landed in Sicily, and its conquest within 38 days hastened the fall of Mussolini.
As the Allied invasion of the Italian mainland began in September the new Italian government signed an armistice with the Allies.
The Germans, however, were determined to resist the Allied advance northwards, and after early rapid progress the American and Commonwealth forces ran into increasingly fierce fighting, particularly around the mountain fortress of Monte Cassino and the Allied bridgehead at Anzio.
These obstacles were not finally overcome until May 1944; in June the Allies liberated Rome.
Meanwhile, there were great victories in Eastern Europe, where in 1943–4 the Russians pushed the Germans back along a 1600-kilometre front (CORE, pp. 69–70).
This success to some extent relieved the Soviet pressure for a second front in Western Europe; but when Stalin met Roosevelt and Churchill in Teheran in November 1943, he was still demanding a commitment to invade France.
Two days after Allied soldiers entered Rome, Operation Overlord — the invasion of Western Europe — was launched.
Massive forces were assembled in the south of England under the command of General Dwight Eisenhower, and on 6 June — D-Day — landings took place on the beaches of Normandy (CORE, pp. 66–7).
By the end of that day the Allies had put 120 000 men ashore; 60 000 American troops made up the assault force on the western beaches of Normandy, nicknamed Utah and Omaha.
Of the 2500 lives lost in the initial assaults, 1465 were American.
Within two weeks the Allies had put a million men into France.
By 10 July a firm front had been established, some 96 kilometres wide and 24 kilometres deep.
Against heavy German resistance, the British and Commonwealth forces advanced along the north, or left, flank, while the two American armies under   Generals George Patton and Omar Bradley pushed forward on the south, or right, flank.
Paris fell on 25 August, 10 days after the American 7th Army, with British and Free French support, had invaded the South of France.
By mid-September the Germans were almost completely driven out of France and Belgium.
But in the winter of 1944 Hitler made one last desperate effort to retrieve the situation.
On a front 80 kilometres wide in the Ardennes Forest, 15 fresh German divisions advanced to within 6.5 kilometres of their target, Namur.
The Allies saved the situation in the "Battle of the Bulge" ; in particular, the rapid advance of the Germans to the Meuse was halted by the heroic resistance of the American 8th Army Corps at Bastogne, reinforced after a 160-kilometre dash by the 101st Airborne Division.
In late December the Americans, backed by Allied air supremacy, broke out of encirclement, and by the end of January 1945 the German armies were once more in full retreat.
Cologne fell to the Americans on 6 March, and next day their advance units reached Remagen on the Rhine.
Here, to their astonishment, they found the Ludendorff railway bridge still intact.
It had explosive charges laid ready to blow it up, and two small ones went off as the American troops started to cross.
Luckily the main detonator failed, the bridge was taken, and within 24 hours 8000 American soldiers were on the east bank of the Rhine.
Meanwhile Soviet armies were sweeping through Germany from the east.
On 25 April Russian and American soldiers met at Torgau on the Elbe; on 30 April Hitler committed suicide in his shelter below the ruins of Berlin; on 7 May the German High Command signed the unconditional surrender document before General Eisenhower at Rheims.
(3) The War in the Far East
In the Far East the sequel to the attack on Pearl Harbour (December 1941) was a grim one for the Americans and their allies.
Accompanying attacks on American bases at Guam and Wake Island led to their capture; Japanese forces also made landings in the Philippines.
In January 1942, the President ordered General MacArthur to withdraw from there to Australia.
The troops remaining in the islands fought a bitter rearguard action.
Their heroic resistance first on the Bataan peninsula and then at the fortress of Corregidor gave the Western Allies a breathing space, but on 6 May the Philippines had to be surrendered.
Many of the captured troops died during the infamous "death march" to the prison camps of Bataan.
Meanwhile the Japanese forces had swept all before them in a huge arc some 4000 kilometres from Tokyo: Malaya, Thailand, Hong Kong, Singapore, much of Burma, and the Dutch East Indies fell by March 942.
By May, New Guinea alone stood between the victorious Japanese and Australia.
But then their advance was halted.
The battle of the Coral Sea (4–8 May) successfully prevented the Japanese from capturing Port Moresby in south-east New Guinea, a move which would have opened the way to Australia.
It was a naval battle of aircraft carriers, in which the opposing ships never saw one another; air power decided the battle in favour of the Americans.
A month later, a similar air-naval battle proved to be a turning-point in the Far Eastern war.
Japanese plans to seize Midway Island, an important US base in the north of the Hawaiian Islands, were thwarted when the fleets met on 3 June 1942, and American dive bombers sank all four Japanese carriers.
The Battle of Midway was a decisive engagement — ensuring that Japanese ascendancy on the high seas was broken.
General MacArthur and Admiral Nimitz, Commander-in-Chief of the  Pacific fleet, devised the technique of "island hopping" in order to regain the initiative in the Pacific.
Strong Japanese positions were "softened up" by intense aerial bombardments, followed by the landing of marine assault forces.
Each island overrun in this way would then serve as a springboard for attack on the next objective.
New and strange names became familiar to the American people as their forces penetrated the outer perimeter of the Japanese positions.
In August 1942, a series of fierce naval battles began around the Solomon Islands in which the USA suffered heavy losses.
Gradually they gained control in the air and, in February 1943, captured Guadalcanal.
In this year the Japanese were driven on to the defensive, with the increasing damage to their shipping creating shortages in essential foodstuffs and vital petrol supplies.
By mid-1944 the Americans reached the Mariana Islands, re-capturing the island of Guam in some of the bloodiest fighting of the war.
MacArthur's major objective was now to recover the Philippines.
In October 1944 his troops landed on Leyte Island to begin the lengthy campaign.
The Japanese, threatened with being cut off from their South-East Asian empire, mounted intense resistance.
Another great naval battle was fought at Leyte Gulf (23–24 October), in which the Japanese employed "kamikaze" (suicide) pilots to crash their explosive laden planes on to the American ships.
It was a decisive victory for the Americans: the Japanese lost two battleships, four aircraft carriers, eight cruisers and numerous destroyers.
The Americans were now masters of the Pacific.
The capital of the Philippines, Manila, was captured in May 1945, and the re-conquest of these islands was completed by July.
A second possible route to an ultimate attack on the Japanese mainland was through China.
But the Allies had been driven back to the borders of India by the initial Japanese offensive.
They had to operate from a precariously-held line stretching 800 kilometres from Akyab on the Bay of Bengal to Ledo at the foot of the Tibetan mountains.
The only link with the Chinese forces was by air, ferrying in supplies and bringing out Chinese troops to be trained with the American forces under General Stilwell.
American aid was sent in to help the Nationalist government of China under "Generalissimo" Chiang Kai-shek.
But attempts to galvanize Chiang into action were largely futile.
For Chiang was so concerned to weaken the power of the Chinese Communists, who had established their own government in northern China, as he was to defeat the Japanese invaders (AA, pp. 55–6).
In addition, much of the aid that the Americans sent lined the pockets of his corrupt regime.
In early 1944, Stilwell's army began to advance from India, building a road as it slowly approached the Japanese base at Myitkyina, 240 kilometres distant.
At the same time, the British 14th Army was driving the enemy back in Burma, and in June 144 the Americans managed to establish air bases on the Chinese mainland from which Japan itself could be raided.
In the autumn, however, the Japanese recaptured the airstrips, and an argument between Stilwell and Chiang led to the former being relieved of his command.
Hopes of a breakthrough in China receded.
But by now, the Allies had secured a promise from Russia that, as soon as the war in Europe was over, she would declare war on Japan — a promise confirmed in February 1945.
Soviet armies would enter the war in the Far East three months after victory in Europe, in return for agreed territorial gains in the area.
Although by early 1945 Japan's power was weakening considerably, her forces continued to put up still resistance to the American advances in the Pacific.
After the fall of the Philippines, a series of epic island battles led to the American capture, at enormous cost, first of Iwo Jima and then of Okinawa.
In the battle for Okinawa, 600 kilometres south of Japan, there were 50 000 American casualties; 110 000 Japanese were killed, including not less than 3500 "kamikaze" pilots lost in suicide raids on US ships.
Bombing of the Japanese mainland was stepped up, threatening, as one American commander put it, "to put Japan back into the Stone Age" .
Still the Japanese refused to surrender and it appeared that the war might drag on for months, even years, at terrible cost.
Suddenly, in July 1945, with the successful testing of the atomic bomb, the Allied found themselves in possession of the means to cut short the war.
The decision to use the bomb remains the most controversial and probably  the most important of the Second World War.
At the Potsdam Conference of Allied leaders, the Japanese were given the deadline of 3 August for surrender.
This passed and on 6 August the first bomb was dropped on Hiroshima, killing outright some 80 000 people and exposing many thousands more to the longer-term but not less deadly effects of radiation.
Three days later, a second bomb devastated the city of Nagasaki.
On 14 August the Japanese surrendered.
(4) The Home Front
As in the First World War, the United States was in one respect more fortunate than the other major powers in the Second World War: she avoided either invasion or aerial bombardment.
Nevertheless the effects of the war on the USA were immense, and her commitment in both manpower and resources was enormous.
Some 15 million American men and women served in the armed forces, of whom over 300 000 were killed; many millions at home were involved in war work.
The people on the home front suffered far  less in the USA than in other countries more directly involved in the war; yet many families felt the impact of the struggle in their personal lives.
The powers of the Federal government were greatly expanded.
The effects of the war on the economy were far-reaching.
Most important of all, the war brought the nation to a position of world leadership, the opportunities and problems of which have remained with the United States ever since 1945.
In a radio address at the end of 1940, Roosevelt had proclaimed "We must be the great arsenal of democracy" .
In March 1941 the Lend Lease scheme made this ideal a reality for America's allies.
In December Pearl Harbor brought a new urgency to the task of converting the economy into a vast war machine.
The problems of converting industries designed for peacetime production to the manufacturing of military equipment were immense, but by 1944 US war production was double that of all the Axis powers combined.
Vast quantities of war materials were turned out: for example, between 1940 and 1945 86 000 tanks, 296 000 aeroplanes, and 76 000 boats of all kinds.
American "know how" and inventiveness flourished.
One example was the development of the Liberty ship, a slow-moving but easily constructed freighter which in 1941 took 355 days to build.
By the end of 1942 one could be built in 56 days using prefabricated parts (the record was 14 days!).
As raw materials became scarce, synthetics were developed.
By the end of 1943 one such scarce commodity, rubber, was being produced synthetically in quantities one third greater than those used before the war.
Scientists — many of them, like the physicists Niels Bohr and Enrico Fermi, refugees from Fascism — put their skills at the disposal of the government.
The results, with one notable exception, were to make improvements to earlier discoveries like radar and jet propulsion, rather than to create totally new techniques or weapons.
The one exception, however, was of potentially horrifying proportions — the development of the first nuclear weapon, the atomic bomb.
Fearing that Germany might win the race to develop this weapon, the US government set up the Manhattan Project, costing $2 billion and involving some 150 000 people, including most of the world's most outstanding physicists.
At special laboratories built in Los Alamos in the New Mexico desert, John R Oppenheimer led a team which succeeded in making an atomic bomb.
It was successfully tested over the deserts of New Mexico on 16 July 1945, before the war with Japan was over.
To mobilize the American economy with such remarkable success, the Roosevelt administration drew on its experience of the New Deal period and created a whole series of new government agencies.
Yet the problem of central control over wartime production was not solved until 1943 with the setting up of the Office of War Mobilization under the direction of James Byrnes, formerly a Supreme Court Justice and a future Secretary of State under President Truman.
The powers of the Federal government inevitably increased as it became the chief customer for the war materials poured out by industry.
Yet the period also saw the revival of government-business co-operation on a scale not evident since the early NIRA days of the New Deal.
The leaders of big business flocked to Washington as Roosevelt put the priority on winning the war rather than on further reform: as he put it, "Dr Win the War" had replaced "Dr New Deal" .
The government sought co-operation with the unions and the farmers as  well as with businessmen.
The National War Labor Board was set up in 1942 to settle the disputes that inevitably rose in a more directed economy.
The unions flourished, gaining over 4 million more members by 1945, and collective bargaining became more widely accepted.
There were industrial conflicts in spite of a no-strike pledge by the unions, and these led Congress to pass the War Labor Disputes Act (1943).
In practice, this did little to curb union activities.
The farmers flourished, aided by good weather, good markets at home and abroad, and government subsidies.
Farm income doubled between 1940 and 1943 while farm debts shrank to half the figure of the early depression period.
For most Americans on the home front, the result of this increased economic activity was a higher standard of living.
Attempts to control inflation, through the Office of Price Administration, and to prevent profiteering, through Harry Truman's special Senate Committee, were not totally successful.
Wages were high and most people had money to spend.
Goods were available for people to buy; even during the war, roughly half the output of the nation was of civilian goods.
Some items were in short supply, like tyres and petrol, and had to be rationed, but there was little real deprivation — and there was always the black market.
People had to become accustomed to much higher taxes: 50 million paid income tax on the new "pay as you go" principle by 1945, compared with 17 million in 1941.
Wealthy people paid a large proportion of the taxes, however, and there was a levelling upwards of income.
The enormous cost of the war — 10 times that of the First World War — created a large Federal government deficit, but the new-found wealth of the country was sufficient to fund it.
Some of the money was raised in the form of war bonds, and personal savings in general rose enormously.
Most significant of all, the war had produced what the New Deal had failed to do over eight years — full employment.
The labour force rose from 45 million in 1940 to 60 million in 1944, and even the addition of many women and young people to the numbers at work caused few problems.
But the war led to the disruption of the lives of many Americans.
Some 15 million of them served in the armed forces, over 11 million going overseas; and it is estimated that another 15 million moved from their homes, mainly in the smaller towns and the rural areas, to the booming sites of the war industries, such as those in California.
Family life was often broken up; the divorce rate jumped and juvenile delinquency rose sharply.
The more important role of women in both the armed services and in industry, however, confirmed a trend towards greater equality between the sexes.
For the blacks, too, the war proved an important stage in their quest for a better deal.
In a war fought against a racist regime in Nazi Germany, the existence of widespread discrimination against blacks in the USA was a considerable embarrassment.
As well as segregation in many aspects of civilian life, there was discrimination against coloured people in both the new defence industries and in the armed forces.
Black protests grew louder, and new movements, like the March on Washington organization and the Congress of Racial Equality, called for an end to discrimination.
White liberals, including the President's wife, Eleanor, gave their support to the cause of the blacks, and in 1941 Roosevelt set up the Committee on Fair  Employment Practices.
This committee, the first civil rights agency since the post-Civil War period, achieved little.
Roosevelt failed to put his personal prestige behind it and discrimination continued, especially in the South.
Of the major unions, the CIO gave its support, but the AF of L was lukewarm.
The wartime shortage of labour ensured more jobs for the blacks, but they seldom got the better jobs.
The armed forces, however, remained essentially segregated and many whites continues to resist changes in race relations.
Violent race riots in 1943 in both Detroit (where 25 blacks died) and in Harlem showed how far the black still had to go to achieve equality.
For another racial minority, the Japanese-Americans, the war period presented an even sorrier tale.
Generally there was much less anti-enemy  hysteria in the Second World War than in the First; but in the post-Pearl Harbor atmosphere the Japanese Americans (the Nisei), mostly inhabitants of California, were rounded up and transported from their Pacific coast homes.
Some 100 000 people were housed for the duration of the war in remote and unpleasant camps in the desert areas of eastern California and Arkansas.
The American Civil Liberties Union called this action "the worst single wholesale violation of civil rights of American citizens in our history." 
In a war presented by the government as a struggle between democracy and dictatorship, it was seen as essential that the normal political processes should continue, so the regular pattern of elections went on.
In the Congressional elections of 1942 the trend away from New Deal reform continued as the Republicans increased their numbers.
They did less well in 1944; yet wartime prosperity was a further factor in diminishing enthusiasm for reform.
The President personally remained immensely popular and in 1944 he fought and won his fourth presidential campaign.
While there was no doubt that Roosevelt would be the Democratic candidate that year, the choice of his running-mate caused greater controversy.
As it turned out, that choice was very important.
Before the war had ended, Roosevelt, the great leader of America in both war and peace, died (April 1945).
At this vital moment, a 60-year-old former Senator from Missouri, Harry S. Truman, now Vice-President, took charge of the strongest country in the world.
The power of  the position which Truman inherited had been immensely increased by Roosevelt's unparalleled 12 years in office, and by his achievements first in meeting the emergency of the Depression and then in directing the nation at war.
6 The Truman Era
(10) Domestic Policy, 1945–8
I felt like the moon, the stars and all the planets had fallen on me…boys, if you ever pray, pay for me now.
With these words to the press, Harry Truman expressed his feelings at the news of Franklin Roosevelt's death on 12 April 1945.
The problems facing the new President were enormous.
As the war in Europe reached its last stages, the task of making a lasting peace seemed certain to be complicated by the differences of policy, already apparent, between the Western Allies and the USSR.
The war in the Far East was far from over, and the fighting was becoming more desperate and costly as the Allies approached the Japanese homeland.
At home many Americans feared a return to the depression conditions of the 1930s as war production slowed down.
In tacking these  problems, Truman would be constantly compared with his predecessor.
He was only President "by accident" and indeed his qualifications for the job seemed modest.
Born in 1884 in rural Missouri, he had little formal education.
He worked on the family farm before the First World War; enlisted in the army and became a captain; and after the war sank his savings into a clothing store, and lost them when it failed.
He turned to politics and found his true vocation, serving the Democratic Party first in local politics, and then at national level as Senator from 1934.
He consistently supported the New Deal yet made little impact in the Senate.
During the Second World War he came to national notice as chairman of a Senate committee set up to check on war contracts and to prevent war profiteering.
The reputation for energy and honesty which Truman gained from this work helped him win the nomination for the vice-presidency in the 1944 election, after more prominent candidates had cancelled each other out.
Within six months he found himself in the White House.
Truman as president was a surprise to many Americans.
He is probably the best example of a belief often expressed about the presidency — that the man holding the office grows in stature to fit the highest position in the nation.
He learned quickly — a vital quality, as Roosevelt had confided little in his Vice-President, and Truman knew few details of government policy.
He was, for example, totally ignorant of the atomic bomb project.
Moreover, Truman was ready to act decisively, following the advice of the card which he displayed prominently on his desk: "The buck stops here" .
Sometimes he acted too hastily or was too reluctant to compromise, and in his first years in the White House he had to endure some harsh criticism.
But his personality — assertive and brash yet essentially both cheerful and tough — gradually communicated itself to the public and helped him to his greatest triumph: his victory in the 1948 election.
Like the most famous of all American Presidents, Harry Truman came from the mid-West; and he too had some of the qualities which contributed to the greatness of Abraham Lincoln — honesty, courage and a willingness to accept responsibility.
Truman's major aim in domestic policy was to consolidate and extend the reforms of the New Deal.
First, however, he had to face the tasks of demobilizing 14 million Americans and of reconverting the economy to peacetime production.
The changes were made with surprisingly little difficulty.
The problems of demobilization were greatly eased by the Servicemen's Readjustment Act (1944), better known as the GI's Bill of Rights, whereby war veterans received extensive unemployment payments and educational opportunities.
Servicemen and women could receive four years of college training free, and some 12 million took the opportunity.
Gloomy forecasts about the economy proved misleading.
Unemployment remained low and industrial expansion, aided by tax cuts and the ending of many wartime controls, was rapid.
There were, however, many problems.
The shortage of many goods for which high wartime wages had been saved sent prices soaring.
Trade union strength had risen steadily since the 1930s from under 4 million members in 1935 to 14.5 million by 1945, and their leaders demanded wage rises to match rising prices.
Truman struggled to keep down prices through the  Office of Price Administration (OPA)— a wartime agency still in existence — but he had limited success.
It was against this troubled background that Truman presented his 21-point programme to Congress in September 1945 — the programme later known as the Fair Deal.
He called for the raising of the national minimum wage; a Full Employment Act; a national conservation scheme; a programme of public works; national control over atomic energy; and, most controversial of all, a national health service.
Only parts of this ambitious scheme were achieved.
A Full Employment Act (1946) was passed, setting up a three-man Council of economic advisers.
The act recognized the role of the Federal government in the planning of the economy, but was weakened by its guarantee of "maximum" rather than "full" employment.
An Atomic Energy Act brought nuclear power under Federal control.
But this proved to be the extent of Congressional action on Truman's programme.
There were several reasons for Truman's lack of success.
His own attention was increasingly diverted to the more immediate problems of holding down prices and wages.
In April 1946 the mine-workers, under their leader John L. Lewis, went on strike, and the railroad unions threatened to follow their lead.
With coal supplies fast dwindling, Truman acted: the Federal government took over the mines and prepared to bring in the army to run the railroads.
The strike was settled and the miners gained most of their demands, but Truman's high-handed actions were resented by the unions.
He could ill afford to lose such support in 1946, the year of the mid-term elections.
His attempts to control prices were having little effect, and in October he abandoned the struggle.
Moreover, there seemed now less need for reform in general than in the 1930s.
In spite of inflation, Americans were enjoying the beginnings of a very real and lasting period of prosperity.
Finally, the victory of the Republicans in the mid-term elections of 1946 in both houses of Congress, their first since 1930, ended any hopes of further progress for Truman's reform programme.
The Republicans forced Truman on the defensive and their greatest victory over the President was the Taft-Hartley Labor-Management Relations Act (1947) passed over Truman's veto.
The act set out to reduce the powers of the unions.
It outlawed the closed shop; forbade "unfair" labour practices; provided for a 90-day "cooling off" period before strike action started; authorized the President to issue an injunction to prevent strikes that might harm the national interest; and banned Communists from union office.
(2) The Election of 1948
Truman appeared to be in deep political trouble as the presidential election of 1948 approached.
The Republicans, confident of victory after their success in 1946, chose as candidate Governor Thomas Dewey of New York, a moderate man whose only disadvantage was his previous failure to win against Roosevelt in 1944.
They adopted a policy platform designed to appeal to moderate opinion, which accepted much of the New Deal.
The harmony of the Republicans made a sharp contrast to the confusion in the Democratic Party's ranks.
Blocked by the Republican Congress, Truman appeared powerless and some leading Democrats approached General Eisenhower as an alternative candidate.
At the Party convention two groups split away, Henry Wallace, calling for a radical policy at home and an attempt to settle differences with the USSR abroad, led an independent Progressive Party.
At the other end of the political spectrum, Governor Strom Thurmond of South Carolina carried southern conservatives into a separate "Dixiecrat" States Rights Party.
This grouping sought to oppose the civil rights programme in which Truman called for the establishment of a more powerful Fair Employment Practices Commission, a law to make lynching a Federal crime, and the removal of obstacles preventing blacks from voting.
Truman, who particularly relished a political battle when he was the underdog, fought back.
He recalled Congress for a special session and challenged it to enact the Republican programme.
When it failed to act, he poured scorn on the "do nothing" Congress.
He embarked on a "whistle-stop" tour, condemning the Republicans as "gluttons of privilege" and revelling in the shouts of "Give 'em hell, Harry" .
The opinion polls and the press had written Truman off; the Chicago Tribune appeared early before the final result was declared with the headline: "Dewey defeats Truman" .
Instead it was a famous victory for the President by a majority of over 2 million votes.
His vigorous attacks on his Republican opponent and Dewey's polite, complacent campaign made a sharp contrast.
Most important of all was the support of two powerful groups with special reasons for wanting a Democratic victory: the blacks, encouraged by Truman's call for an end to discrimination; and organized labour, bitterly smarting from the Taft-Hartley Act.
Their votes in particular gave Truman victory in the all-important cities.
The two breakaway parties did not affect the result decisively, as most of the "don't knows" in the opinion polls came down in favour of the Democrats.
(3) Truman's Second Term: Fair Deal And Loyalty
Truman's victory encouraged him to revive the battle for the Fair Deal.
Although the Democrats had recaptured control of both the Senate and the House, there remained a conservative majority made up of southern Democrats and Republicans.
Again, therefore, Truman had to be satisfied with pursuing only parts of his reform programme.
Minimum wages were raised from 40c to 75c an hour, and social security benefits were increased to cover an additional 10 million people.
A Federal Housing Act (1949) provided funds for slum clearance and housing for those on low incomes, though it only scratched the surface of an increasingly serious problem.
New Deal measures in conservation and agriculture were extended.
But there was also a long list of failures.
Congress refused to repeal the Taft-Hartley Act or to pass bills advocating health insurance, Federal aid to education, and fair employment practices (the last a central measure in the battle for civil rights).
Any chance of further progress with the Fair Deal was dashed by a dramatic combination of events, at home and abroad, in 1950.
The central  issue was anti-communism; the principal figure in the drama, Senator Joseph McCarthy.
Fears of communism had deep roots in the past (p.6) and they had increased as the Cold War developed after 1945.
Fears about the growth of Communist power abroad were matched by fears of Communist agents working within the USA to undermine the American way of life.
The discovery of a Russian spy ring in Canada in 1946 sounded the alarm, and in 1947 Truman initiated an investigation into the loyalty of all Federal employees.
It was, however, the case of Alger Hiss that created a national sensation and opened the way to a full-scale Communist "witch hunt" .
Hiss, a former New Dealer and high-ranking State Department official, was accused of having passed on classified information to the Russians in the 1930s.
The accusations were made by a self-confessed former Communist agent named Whittaker Chambers.
Hiss denied the charges and unsuccessfully sued Chambers for libel; then he in his turn was tried for perjury and sentenced in January 1950 to five years in prison.
The case shocked the  public: here was a respected intellectual, close to the highest circles in the Democratic Party and the Federal government, apparently exposed as a traitor.
How many others in such exalted positions were disloyal?
The Hiss case came to a climax at a moment when the confidence of Americans in the strength of their world position had been shaken by a series of events abroad.
In 1949, the Chinese Communist Party had taken control over the Chinese mainland (AA, p. 58), and the Americans had detected evidence in the atmosphere of the first known Russian A-bomb.
The invasion of South Korea by the Communist North Koreans in June 1950 heightened the public's feelings of insecurity (CORE, pp. 150–51)
Against this background emerged the figure of Senator Joe McCarthy, the junior Senator for Wisconsin.
Elected in 1946, the had hitherto failed to make much impression; financially backed by a soft drinks company, whose interests he advocated, he was dismissed as the "Pepsi Cola kid" .
Up for re-election in 1952, he was looking around for a cause that would be electorally popular, and found it in anti-communism.
In February 1950, in a speech at Wheeling in West Virginia, he claimed to have in his possession a list of 205 Communists employed in the State Department.
He never in fact produced the list (which in a speech the next day had been mysteriously reduced to 57) but his smear tactics worked in an atmosphere of fear.
In addition to the conviction of Hiss, 1950 brought the trial in Britain of the former Los Alamos scientist, Klaus Fuchs, found guilty of passing nuclear secrets to the Soviet Union.
Information from Fuchs led to the arrest, and in 1953, the execution of the Americans Julius and Ethel Rosenberg.
There were real threats to Western security, but not one of them was uncovered by Senator McCarthy.
Instead he led an increasingly wild campaign, always hinting at treason in high places but never proving it.
Almost daily a new sensation was announced, just in time to catch the press deadlines or peak-time television.
The principle of "guilt by association" was introduced; people who had once been members of the Communist Party or a group sympathetic to that party, however long before, were smeared as security risks and their careers ruined.
The victims ranged from intellectuals, university professors whose advice had been sought by the government, and distinguished scientists who had once had associations with "left-wing" organizations, to writers, broadcasters and Hollywood actors and directors.
To oppose McCarthy was to invite hints about one's own loyalty.
Both the Senate and the administration seemed powerless to stem the tide of hysteria.
A Senate committee, chaired by a respected Democrat, Millard Tydings, examined McCarthy's list and found his charges unproven, but this made no impression on McCarthy or on public opinion.
Fears of communism increased with the outbreak of the Korean War (1950), and Congress passed, over the President's veto, a stringent anti-Communist act — the McCarran Internal Security Act (1950).
Under its terms, Communist or "front" organizations had to register with the Attorney-General; their members were banned from employment in defence plants, and prevented from obtaining passports; and no foreigner who had been a member of the Communist Party could enter the USA.
Liberal hopes of real progress in Truman's second administration disappeared in a climate of increasing intolerance.
(4) Foreign Affairs: The Coming of the Cold War, 1945–50
The post-war years saw a revolution in American foreign policy.
There was no attempt, as there had been in 1919, to withdraw from a world role.
Both Roosevelt and Truman, with the support of majorities in both political parties, followed a policy of active American leadership in the new world organization, the United Nations.
In April 1945, Truman's government played host to representatives from 50 countries at San Francisco who had met to draw up the Charter for the United Nations.
Underlying the enthusiasm that greeted this new attempt at international co-operation there remained an unknown factor: could the wartime co-operation of the Western Allies and the USSR be maintained now that their common enemy in Europe had been defeated?
At the Yalta Conference in February 1945 (CORE, pp. 74–5) Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin had met to discuss the post-war settlement in Europe and Asia.
While FDR had avoided definite recognition of Russian control of much of Eastern Europe, he had not been able to get more than general promises of free elections and independent governments for Soviet-dominated areas.
He had, however, remained optimistic that the agreements reached at Yalta would be kept: in his last message to Churchill he had written "I would minimize the general Soviet problem." 
Truman, lacking the experience of foreign affairs, was surrounded by the same advisers as Roosevelt and was willing to continue the same policy.
However, when he met those advisers a few days after assuming office, it was clear that many of them were gravely suspicious of Russian aims in the post-war period.
In the succeeding months it became plain that the determination of American leaders to play the key role in shaping the new world order was to clash with the equally determined insistence of the Russians that their interests were of paramount importance over a large part of the globe.
In July 1945, Truman had his first experience of direct contact with Stalin when they met, along with Churchill (later replaced by Attlee), at the Potsdam Conference.
The experience was not an encouraging one, as differences emerged over the future treatment of Germany and Eastern Europe.
The need for Russian assistance in the war against Japan, agreed to at Yalta, was now irrelevant; for, as Truman casually informed Stalin, the Americans had successfully tested "a new weapon of unusual destructive force" .
Truman later record that at Potsdam he "saw at first hand what we and the West had to face in the future" .
But the new President, in spite of his doubts about Soviet motives, did not rush towards a showdown with Stalin.
The US government felt that it possessed two weapons with which it could influence the Russians.
In military terms, it had sole possession of the A-bomb; in economic terms, it was in infinitely better shape than the war-torn Soviet Union.
Though there was never any intention of using the bomb against Russia, it lay in the background as a threat.
When the Americans were pressed to share knowledge of nuclear power with the Russians, they proposed the Baruch plan (so named after its originator), which called for a system of open inspection among the powers that joined in the plan, and was unacceptable to the Soviet government.
The economic "weapon" could be used more directly.
Wartime aid, in the form of Lend Lease, was cut off  abruptly six days after VJ day, though Truman later apologised to Stalin for the abruptness of the action which, he explained, was due to "administrative error" .
There was, however, no error in the long-drawn out delays in discussing Russia's request for a massive reconstruction loan.
It became clear to Truman as the months passed that the Soviet government was taking little heed of these threats and that differences over the composition of the Polish and other East European governments, over the fate of Germany and a host of other issues, remained as wide as ever.
By mid-1946, serious alarm was being expressed within the USA about Soviet expansion in Europe (coupled with the revelations from Canada of a Soviet atomic spy ring), and a tougher line began to emerge from the White House on foreign policy issues.
Up to 1946, Truman had been able to rely on support from both Democrats and Republicans in dealing with the Soviet Union.
Now the leading Republican spokesmen on foreign policy, Senator Vandenberg and John Foster Dulles, became openly critical of the administration for being too soft on what they considered to be the threat from Russia.
The approach of the mid-term Congressional elections in November 1946, and the evidence from the public opinion polls that the American people had moved from wartime admiration of Russia to a grave suspicion of Soviet aims, were further pressures on Truman to take a tougher line.
In September 1946, the Secretary of State, James Byrnes, made a speech expressing America's determination to rebuilt the economy of the American zone in Germany whether the Russians agreed or not.
Public opinion for the most part approved, but among the voices raised in protest was that of Truman's Secretary of Commerce, the veteran New Dealer, Henry Wallace.
When he pleaded the case for continued co-operation with the Russians, at first privately in a letter to Truman and then openly in a public speech, the President, dismissed him.
Truman and most those advising him had come to believe that the Soviet Union was aiming to spread the Communist system whenever and wherever it could: to Poland, Bulgaria, Rumania, Hungary.
These, it was thought, were just the first countries on the list.
From 1946 the United States replied to this seeming threat with the policy of "containment" .
This involved the long-term use of American economic and military power to contain Russian expansionism, and to prevent the Soviet Communist system from gaining more ground.
It was put into practice by Truman in March 1947 when the British government informed the USA that it was no longer able to aid the Greek government in its civil war with left-wing forces.
The Americans, fearing the advance of Russian influence into Greece and Turkey, both vital strategic areas in the eastern Mediterranean, responded by offering the two countries massive economic aid.
In calling on Congress for this aid the President outlined the broad policy, which soon came to be known as the Truman Doctrine.
He drew a clear division between the "free" world and the Communist world, and made it equally clear that if the Soviet Union tried to expand into the free world the USA was prepared to act.
In his own words: I believe that it must be the policy of the USA to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressure.
Thus the lines of the Cold War in Europe had now been drawn.
Confrontation had replaced negotiation.
The sequel came in the following year.
If communism was to be contained, then the economic weaknesses and poverty which could help it to develop in Western Europe had to be removed.
In Italy and France in particular the Communists had done well in post-war elections.
The American answer was massive economic aid under the European Recovery Programme of 1948, better known (after its chief architect, Secretary of State George Marshall) as Marshall Aid.
Opposition to this plan in the USA disappeared as news came of the Communist take-over of Czechoslovakia in February 1948 (CORE, p. 89).
Congress voted an initial $4 billion of aid.
During the next three years, millions of dollars stimulated the economic recovery of Western Europe, as well as providing a huge stimulus to the US economy.
The Soviet Union denounced the Marshall Aid programme as an instrument of Western imperialism, and retaliated by tightening their control over their East European satellites.
The tensions in divided Europe reached crisis point in June 1948, when the Russians established a blockade around the Western sectors of Berlin (CORE, pp. 83–5).
This move was an attempt to hamper the Western policy of setting up a new Federal West Germany government over the three Western zones.
An attempt to break the blockade by land across the Russian zone was rejected in favour of an airlift of supplies to West Berlin.
The plan worked magnificently and the West Berliners, determined to remain in the Western camp, received 2 500 000 tons of food, fuel and other supplies from the 277 000 flights by the Americans and British, before the blockade was lifted in May 1949.
These events hastened moves towards a formal military alliance of the Western powers, and in April 1949, 12 (later 15) powers signed the North Atlantic Treaty, which set up the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) under which the signatories agreed that an attack on any one of them would lead to whatever action was deemed necessary, including the "use of armed force" (CORE, pp. 85–6).
The revolution in US foreign policy was now complete.
For the first time in peace, the US government had committed itself to a firm military alliance.
The means by which the US would sustain this new position in world affairs were outlined in a policy document — NSC 68 — issued in March 1950, two months after Truman had ordered the development of the hydrogen bomb.
This described the threat, as America saw it, of Soviet power and proposed that the way to resist this "mortal challenge" was the immediate and rapid build-up of American military strength.
The signal to start this building was the Korean War which broke out in June 1950.
(5) The Cold War Spreads: the "Fall" of China and the Korean War, 1949–52
The Cold War became truly worldwide in scope as a result of events in the Far East between 1949 and 1950.
After the defeat of Japan in 1945, China  had become a battleground for a civil war, fought between the forces of its Nationalist ruler, Chiang Kai-shek, and those of the Chinese Communist Party, led by Mao Tse-tung (AA, pp. 57–9).
The US government had hoped that some form of non-Communist coalition government could be set up in post-war China, and General Marshall had led a mission to achieve this end in 1946.
But the Chinese parties could reach no compromise.
Although aware that Chiang's regime was both inefficient and corrupt, Washington saw no alternative — in view of American public opinion — to a continued policy of aiding the Nationalists.
Truman attempted to tie the financial aid provided to a programme of reform, which Chiang promised to undertake, but which never in fact materialized.
In 1949, the Communists drove him and the remnants of the Nationalists forces from the mainland to a refuge on the island of Formosa (Taiwan).
The Truman administration was widely condemned for allowing the "fall" of China, although, as Secretary of State Dean Acheson pointed out, there was little more the US could do for   Chiang — short of direct intervention by US forces in the civil war.
This had been ruled out by Truman from the start as far too dangerous and unlikely to be successful in such a vast country, with much of the population hostile.
As anti-Communist hysteria swept the USA such a realistic view was widely ignored.
But Truman did not hesitate to intervene in the next crisis in the Far East, when North Korean troops invaded the South Korean Republic on 25 June 1950 (CORE, pp. 150–51).
Korea had been divided into two zones in 1945, Communist to the north of the 38th parallel and non-Communist to the south.
Two separate governments had grown up, backed by the two super-powers.
Truman, believing that the invasion by the North Koreans was Soviet-inspired, immediately despatched United States sea and air forces to the South Korean Republic.
Only after this prompt action did he secure Congressional support, and, close on this, the support of the UN Security Council.
Though the North Koreans were equipped by the Russians, the reasons for their invasion of the South remain mysterious.
Their action may have resulted from purely local causes: there had been many border clashes.
The Russians certainly seemed unprepared for it.
They were at this time boycotting the Security Council in protest at the UN refusal to replace Taiwan by Communist China; hence there was no Soviet veto on sending UN forces to support South Korea.
Sixteen members of the United Nations responded to the call for action, though the main military forces were American (48% of the troops, with 43% provided by South Korea).
The first task was to halt the rapid North Korean advance, then the Un commander-in-chief, General MacArthur, launched a counter-attack, allied with a brilliant flanking movement made  possible by an amphibious assault on Inchon.
Now it was the North Koreans"turn to retreat, in some disorder, north of the 38th parallel.
With UN approval MacArthur pursued them across the parallel and on towards the Yalu River which marked the border with Communist China.
This decision to free the whole of Korea from Communist control was a turning-point in the war.
MacArthur, who had flown to meet Truman at the Pacific island of Guam, was confident that the Chinese government would not intervene in Korea.
But in November 1950 the Chinese sent some 250 000 "volunteers" across the Yalu, and the war swung back in favour of the North Koreans and their allies as they drove the UN forces back to the 38th parallel.
In this new situation MacArthur advocated the extension of the war by bombing raids deep into Chinese territory to destroy the Communist supply bases.
Truman, fearing the escalation of the war and confident that the UN forces could hold their line, turned down MacArthur's advice.
The General, furious at this rebuff, made public his differences with Truman, whereupon the President dismissed him.
It was a brave decision: MacArthur was extremely popular (a Gallop Poll reported 69% in his favour), and returned home to a hero's welcome.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff, however, backed Truman's decision, and gradually much American opinion changed to the view that the President had acted wisely.
In Korea negotiations for an armistice began in the summer of 1951, but became bogged down as the American nation, unused to anything but total success, grew weary of the struggle, which dragged on indecisively throughout the remainder of Truman's Presidency.
The Korean War marked the spread of the Cold War beyond Europe and the Atlantic: henceforward the US government saw the containment of communism as a global task.
Besides the commitment in Korea, the United States made a firm treaty with Japan in 1951 to ensure that she remained in the Western camp.
She also recognized Chiang's Nationalist government in Formosa (Taiwan) as the legitimate government of China rather than the Communist regime at Peking.
The French in Indo-China were given economic aid with which to combat communism.
The Cold War had developed out of mutual suspicions, particularly over the German problem (CORE, pp. 81–7), and also out of misunderstandings.
Americans, for example, believed that Stalin was following a definite plan for the expansion of communism throughout the world — when in reality his aim may have been the much more defensive one of building barriers round the Russian homeland.
Likewise Stalin held exaggerated fears of a Western "plot" to destroy communism whenever and wherever it appeared.
Whatever its causes, the Cold War had become a permanent and dominating feature of international life.
7 The Republicans in Power, 1953–61
(1) Domestic Policy under Eisenhower
The presidential election of 1952 brought the Republicans back to power for the first time in 20 years.
Their campaign focussed on "the mess in Washington" , and the main issues were expressed in a simple formula: K1, C2 — Korea, communism and corruption.
The frustrations of the long struggle in Korea, combined with McCarthy's campaign, suggested that America's problems resulted from a "softness on communism" that pervaded the Truman administration.
When corruption was exposed in high places in the Democratic Party (though not touching Truman personally) the formula was complete.
Moreover, the Republicans had found the ideal candidate, a man of known honesty and a war-hero — General Dwight D. Eisenhower.
A boy from the "cow town" of Abilene in Kansas, "Ike" had spent his entire career as a professional soldier.
He had enjoyed immense public prestige as Supreme Commander, Allied Forces, 1944–6, and Supreme Commander, NATO, 1950–52, and at the same time he had managed to remain above the political squabbles of the period.
He projected the idea of the national leader, a man of moderation and common sense who could bring unity to all Americans.
The Republican Party ticket was nicely balanced by the election for the vice-presidency of the fiercely anti-Communist Senator from California, Richard M. Nixon.
Truman's decision not to stand left open the Democratic nomination, which went eventually to Governor Adlai Stevenson of Illinois.
He was in many ways the wrong choice in the harsh atmosphere of 1952.
Clever, witty and articulate, he came from the intellectual elite which McCarthy so effectively attacked as responsible for many of America's problems.
When Eisenhower promised during the campaign that, if elected, he would at once fly to victory.
In the event, he captured 39 states and some 34 million votes to Stevenson's nine states and 27 million votes.
Yet the return of the Republicans from the wilderness did not lead to massive changes in domestic policy.
They had carefully avoided any election pledge to dismantle the structure of New Deal and Fair Deal programmes.
But they maintained the traditional Republican hostility to "big" government, and promised to reduce government spending and government intervention in ordinary people's lives.
Eisenhower was essentially a moderate in politics and saw his role as one of "holding the line" between extremes, either of conservatism or liberalism.
He  was not in favour of an over-active presidency — as he saw that of Roosevelt — but instead proposed to consult widely and act only after calm deliberation.
Aware of his political inexperience, he sought advice from his cabinet in domestic matters and the National Security Council in foreign affairs.
As head of the party which had always represented big business interests, he  chose his cabinet mainly from the business world: "eight millionaires and a plumber" was a contemporary description — and the plumber, the Secretary of Labor, left within a year.
Eisenhower quickly learned that political life was considerably less orderly than that of the army; but he had one great asset — enormous personal popularity.
To the mass of Americans, he remained "Ike" — a friendly and unpretentious man, who "incorporated in personality, manner and appearance all that Americans liked to picture as the national virtues" .
President Eisenhower set out to heal the divisions in the nation.
But his record on one of the main causes of those divisions — McCarthyism — was hesitant and indecisive.
McCarthy's Communist witch-hunt had been unleashed with the support of leading Republicans and had undoubtedly helped to elect Eisenhower in 1952.
The new President, himself called "a stooge of communism" by the Wisconsin Senator at an earlier date, was known to detest McCarthy personally.
Any hopes, however, that Eisenhower would use his great prestige to restrain McCarthy were soon dashed.
McCarthy, appointed chairman of a powerful Senate sub-committee, stepped up his campaign by attacking the State Department's radio service, Voice of America, as Communist-influenced.
He also sent two young assistants, Roy Cohn and David Schine, on a well-publicized tour of US embassy libraries in Europe to hunt out "subversive literature" .
Works thought to be suspect — including, ludicrously, novels by Ernest Hemingway and the  detective writer, Dashiell Hammett — were withdrawn from the libraries and some books were even burned.
In a rare intervention, Eisenhower ordered that such excesses, so reminiscent of Nazi Germany, should immediately cease.
In general, however, the President stood aloof, refusing as he put it "to get down in the gutter with that guy" .
His own officials meanwhile conducted a further loyalty check on government employees, and Vice-President Nixon boasted "We" re kicking the Communists and fellow travellers…out of the government not by the hundred but by the thousands."
The fall of McCarthy came in 1954 as a result of his own excesses and the actions of a few courageous individuals, rather than from any official disapproval.
His attack on individuals had become increasingly scandalous: he described an elderly Senate colleague as "a living miracle" — the only man who has lived so long with neither brains nor guts".
He finally over-reached himself — and roused Eisenhower — by launching an investigation into the loyalty of the army itself.
The subsequent televised hearings exposed no Communist infiltrators, and made plain to millions the viciousness of McCarthy as he cast about for victims.
In December, after Eisenhower had belatedly denounced him for trying to "set himself above the laws of our land" , he was condemned by the Senate.
His career collapsed as quickly as it had begun, and he died from alcoholism in 1957.
The extraordinary power and influence of "McCarthyism" in "the land of the free" over a period of four years cries out for explanation.
The Senator was a gifted demagogue, with particular skill in manipulating press and television.
He exploited deep-seated fears about communism, well-established before the appeared on the scene.
But the deliberate use of McCarthyism by the leaders of the Republican Party as a weapon against the Democrats offers perhaps the most convincing explanation of its success.
The Republican leadership ha been stunned by its unexpected defeat in 1948.
Wealthy party members, including newspaper owners and businessmen, saw McCarthy as a weapon with which they could ensure victory in 1952, and backed the Senator financially.
As one respected Republican leader put it, "McCarthy should keep talking and if one case does not work out he should proceed with another." 
The Republicans used the issue of communism within the USA to devastating effect in the 1952 election campaign.
Anti-communism did not die as an issue after 1954, but the worse excesses were over.
The damage done by McCarthy was immense.
His blend of smears, half truths and downright lies ruined many careers in government and the professions.
Labelling men and women as "disloyal" did great harm to traditional civil liberties, and gravely damaged morale in the civil service, above all in the State Department.
Robert Oppenheimer, the "father of the atomic bomb" , was the most famous case of being found "guilty by association" .
In 1954, he was cut off from all classified material because of earlier association with Communists — who included his own brother.
There was never a vestige of evidence that he had passed information to the Russians, and eventually in 1962 he was rehabilitated.
The Republicans were fortunate in coming to power at a time of growing prosperity.
America in the 1950s was accurately described by a leading economists as "the affluent society" in which most people — though not all — were better off than ever before.
Real incomes and personal savings were  rising along with increased industrial output and business dividends.
A consumer boom, based on credit buying, had by 1956 enabled 81% of adult Americans to own a television, 96% a refrigerator, and 81% a washing machine.
There were over 70 million cars on the roads, many of them used by commuting middle-class Americans who were escaping in ever-increasing numbers from the over-crowded city centres to the more comfortable suburbs.
Little noticed at the time were large groups who missed out in the general prosperity: the blacks, poor farmers, lower-paid workers, and the old people living on small fixed pensions, who suffered particularly from one of the continuing problems of the economy inflation.
The task of managing even so thriving an economy was difficult.
Eisenhower had promised to cut government spending and taxes in accordance with the Republican philosophy of lessening the role of government in people's lives.
But the reduction of Federal expenditure, together with the end of the Korean War and the resultant drop in military spending, led to a recession in 1953, with a rise in unemployment.
This was a short-lived setback; but the pattern was repeated in 1957 when stringent cuts in the budget brought arise in unemployment from 4% of the working population to 7.5%.
On each occasion, the Republican administration was forced to stimulate the economy in very much the same way as the Democrats would have done.
Drastic changes of policy would have been very difficult, as attempts to cut Federal spending and to balance the budget revealed.
More than half the budget was made up of defence spending, and the Republicans, with their promises of a tough stance against the Soviet Union, could hardly make severe economies in this field.
Another large area of spending was that of Federal welfare schemes.
Eisenhower, keeping to his essentially moderate approach in domestic affairs, in fact increased welfare spending and extended Social Security to the self-employed in 1954.
The budget remained out of balance and the Republicans left office in 1960 with a $20 million deficit.
Yet moderate Republicanism. differing from Democratic policies in emphasis rather than in real substance, appeared to strike exactly the right note with the electorate.
The Republicans lost their narrow majority in Congress at the 1954 mid-term elections; but Eisenhower's personal popularity ensured that they retained the White House in 1956, when he defeated Adlai Stephenson by an even greater margin than in 1952.
(2) Eisenhower and Civil Rights
Civil rights, the Black problem, race relations, the inequality of blacks in American life — whatever form of words was used to describe this issue, most Americans of the middle years of the 20th century saw it as the gravest problem facing them at home.
Moreover, it had serious consequences abroad.
It offended the friends and allies of the USA, especially in western Europe; and in the Cold War years it provided splendid propaganda for her enemies in the Communist World.
On the eve of American entry into the Second World War, all the social statistic used to measure people's well-being showed that blacks were far worse off than whites in the United States.
A higher proportion of blacks were unemployed; and of those who had work, the great majority were in  unskilled and lower-paid jobs.
Their education and their housing were markedly inferior.
Their average life expectancy was 12 years less than that of whites, their infant mortality rate twice that of whites.
In the southern states, where in 1940 three-quarters of the blacks lived, the "Jim Crow" laws, dating from the late 19th century, condemned them to separate and inferior facilities on trains, in waiting-rooms and lavatories, in restaurants and drinking-fountains.
Blacks were segregated in churches, schools and colleges.
In the South, too, the scales of the law courts were tilted against them; they were for the most part deprived of the right to vote, by various devices, notably the poll tax imposed on every voter; and socially they were treated as lower-grade humans.
The Second World War, a war fought for freedom and against a Nazi dictatorship notorious for its racist policies, was something of a turning-point in this unhappy tale of race relations in the USA.
Black leaders showed a new and sharper determination in calling for equality; they were no doubt encouraged by Eleanor Roosevelt's support for their cause, though the New Deal did little in practice for them.
The number of black soldiers rose from 100 000 to 700 000.
But the US Army remained segregated, with separate training and units and with black officers inferior to whites of similar rank — though the Navy moved closer to integration; and there were race riots in army camps during the war years.
There were more serious outbreaks in some cities, for example in Detroit — and these reflected what for blacks was the most important of all wartime developments.
Between 1941 and 1946 more than a million blacks moved from the South to the great cities of the North and West in search of work in the swollen industrial plants of wartime.
This great migration gave to the black population, concentrated in the inner-city areas of which Harlem in New York was only the most famous, real political power for the first time.
Henceforward the black vote had to be considered by every politician, and black leaders became more outspoken as they demanded an end to segregation.
President Truman, a longtime supporter of civil rights — who may have owed his unexpected victory in the close contest of 1948 to black voters in the northern cities — made some progress towards equal status for blacks in the armed forces and in Federal employment.
But the main crisis over this issue was to occur during Eisenhower's presidency.
At its heart was the pressure of blacks and of their liberal white supporters for equal opportunities in education.
In 1954 the US Supreme Court, headed by Chief Justice Earl Warren, handed down its decision in the case of Brown v. the Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas.
Brown, a black parent, was supported by the NAACP (National Association for the Advancement of Colored People) in a case designed to test the widespread practice of having separate schools for blacks and whites.
The Court declared such practice unconstitutional as the black schools were invariable inferior.
There was an immediate outcry from whites in the South, and preparations were made to resist the Court's decision.
In 1955 the Court insisted that the order be carried out with "all deliberate speed" .
Some southern areas managed the change to integrated schools without much difficulty; but many used every possible delaying tactic.
In 1957, delay gave way to open defiance of the Supreme Court in the  Deep South state of Arkansas.
An attempt by black students to enter the all-white Central High School in Little Rock was forcibly prevented by state troopers under orders from Governor Orval Faubus.
President Eisenhower persuaded Faubus to remove the state troopers, but this brought riots, as white crowds beat and insulted black youths attempting to enter the school.
The President now had no alternative but Federal action if the law was to be upheld, and he sent 1000 paratroops to occupy the school and its surroundings.
Flanked by troops with fixed bayonets the nine black students then entered the school.
Passions gradually subsided in Little Rock, and elsewhere, but the progress of school integration remained very slow: 10 years later only about 10% of black children in the South attended desegregated schools.
It was not only in schooling that pressure came for an end to segregation.
The Court's decision of 1954 sparked off a wide-ranging civil rights movement among blacks.
At the same time, the blacks found one of their most notable leaders.
The Reverend Martin Luther King achieved his first success in Montgomery, Alabama, when in 1955 he organized a boycott of  the bus-services of the city by 17 000 blacks.
This sprang from the arrest of a middle-aged black woman, Rosa Parks, who had refused to give up her seat in the section the bus reserved for whites.
King, 27 years old and a Baptist minister, was a great orator and an inspiring leader.
The tactics used in Montgomery worked: most of the bus company's customers were blacks and, with business dwindling, it abandoned segregation.
Martin Luther King, now the leader of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC 1957), believed in non-violent methods and consciously followed the teachings of the Indian leader, Mahatma Gandhi.
By rejecting violence, King hoped that he could convince white people of the justice of the black man's cause.
It was a courageous policy, which became increasingly difficult to sustain in face of the violence to which southern blacks were subjected.
Black leaders, including King, were shot at and their homes were bombed.
Yet the protest movements continued and found new tactics, like the "sit-in" , first used in 1960 by a student organization, the Congress for Racial Equality (CORE).
Its members occupied seats reserved for whites in a lunch counter at a Woolworth store in Greensboro, North Carolina, after they had been refused service.
Little Rock had forced the Eisenhower administration to act and in the same year, 1957, the President had put his support behind the first Civil Rights Act passed for over 80 years.
This set up a Civil Rights Commission empowered to assist blacks to exercise their right to vote.
A special section of the Justice Department was to help in taking difficult cases to the courts.
The act was strengthened in 1960 when officials who prevented a black from voting could be jailed.
Inevitably, in the South ways were found of evading the act, but it was a useful first step.
Eisenhower, who was not unsympathetic to the plight of the blacks, did not see legislation as the real answer to the problem: "I do not believe you can change the hearts of men with laws and decisions." 
His belief in gradual change was, however, being increasingly challenged by black leaders who demanded immediate and decisive action.
(3) Eisenhower, Dulles and Foreign Policy
Foreign policy under Eisenhower revealed the ever-widening commitment of the USA as a world power.
The Korean War had signalled the extension of the Cold War outside Europe.
Mao's establishment of "Red China" meant that Americans saw the struggle against communism as a worldwide conflict.
In the 1952 election campaign the Republicans promised to take a tough line with the Russians, and the appointment of John Foster Dulles as Secretary of State seemed the first step in fulfilling that pledge.
Dulles, whose experience in foreign policy stretched back to the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, saw communism as an evil system which should not just be "contained" but positively "rolled back" .
He talked of "liberating" the captive peoples of the Soviet bloc, the satellite countries of Eastern Europe.
His language was often alarming, not least to America's allies: he spoke of meeting Soviet aggressive with "massive retaliation" (that is, nuclear weapons), and the need, in diplomacy, to have the nerve for "brinkmanship" (being prepared to go to the brink of nuclear war).
Fortunately his words were usually more ferocious than his actions, and, although he had Eisenhower's  full confidence, the President played a restraining role in foreign affairs.
But a view of the world that divided it so sharply between good and evil could only increase tension and lead to some clumsy decisions.
In the end, as a review of the major areas of American foreign policy in the 1950s suggests, Republican actions did not differ radically from those of their Democratic predecessors.
The first test in Europe of the theory of "liberation" came as early as 1953 when, after the death of Stalin, unrest in the satellite countries came to a head with a rising by the people of East Germany.
The Russians speedily crushed the revolt, with the USA unable to do more than stand by and condemn their action.
The powerlessness of the Americans was underlined again in 1956 when they were unable to help the Hungarians in their rising (CORE, pp. 91–3).
To have intervened on either occasion might well have started a Third World War, and each time Dulles withdrew from the brink.
The Secretary of State found it difficult enough to maintain the unity of his allies in Europe over the question of re-arming Germany.
His enthusiastic support for the creation of a European Defence Community, under which a European Army, including German troops, would be established, met strong French opposition.
The plan had to be dropped, and eventually a British suggestion was adopted, under which West Germany was re-armed, but her forces were placed under the control of NATO.
Although the Republicans had pledged themselves to a tough stand against the Soviet Union, they could not ignore the fact that Stalin's death in 1953 opened the possibility of improvement in East-West relations.
The new Russian leaders seemed anxious for a thaw in the Cold War, and despite Dulles "reservations, the President agreed to a" summit"meeting at Geneva in July 1955.
Its results were meagre; the Russians agreed to consider Eisenhower's "open skies" proposal for aerial inspection of military installations (only to reject it later), and there was some talk of a new spirit in international affairs — the "spirit of Geneva" .
The events in Hungary and the Suez crisis in 1956 brought a rapid return of tension (CORE, pp. 141–3).
Not until the final year of Eisenhower's presidency was there a further attempt at summit diplomacy.
Dulles died in 1959 an in May 1960, Eisenhower met Khrushchev in Paris.
The conference was wrecked before it started by the "U2" incident.
An American U2 reconnaissance plane was shot down over Russia and its pilot, Gary Powers, captured.
After first suggesting that the U2 had accidentally wandered over the Soviet Union, the President admitted that such "spy" flights were a regular occurrence.
Khrushchev appeared in Paris long enough to make an angry denunciation of American policy and then withdrew, leaving an embarrassed Eisenhower to return home, empty-handed.
In Asia, Eisenhower fulfilled his election pledge to end the war in Korea in 1953.
But his two administrations saw an extension of American commitments in Asia.
For the USA declined to give diplomatic recognition to the Communist government in Peking or to allow China's entry into the United Nations.
Relations between the Americans and the Communist Chinese were strained by American support for the claims of Chiang's government to  the islands of Quemoy and Matsu, which lay three kilometres off the mainland.
Totally insignificant in themselves, the islands became a test case of American readiness to support the Taiwan government.
When Chinese gun batteries bombarded the islands in late 1953, Eisenhower secured a Congressional resolution (January 1954) granting him sweeping powers to protect the Nationalist Chinese.
The bombardment ceased, only to be resumed in 1958.
Warships from the American 7th Fleet moved to the area, while Khrushchev warned the Americans against any attempt to attack the mainland.
Public concern about war over such a trivial issue led Eisenhower to lower the temperature by offering to request a withdrawal of at least part of Chiang's garrisons on the islands in return for a cease-fire.
The Peking government stopped the bombardment for two weeks, eventually declaring they would only shell the islands on alternate days!
By this time a more serious problem had arisen in South-East Asia (p.93).
In the Middle East the tensions created between Arabs and Jews by the formation of the state of Israel in 1948 mingled with those of the Cold war to produce a highly inflammatory atmosphere.
The policy-makers in Washington faced a series of dilemmas.
Their consistent support for the new Israeli state reflected the existence of an American Jewish community — wealthy, strong in voting power, and highly organized as a political pressure group.
But this had to be reconciled with the need for good relations with the oil-rich Arab countries.
The declining strength of the British and French, the former colonial powers of the area, added a further complication.
And, above all, Americans were determined to keep the Middle East free from Communist domination.
The first venture of Dulles into this delicate area of diplomacy brought the Americans an apparent success.
In 1951, the Prime Minister of Iran, Muhammad Mossadegh, had nationalized the British-owned Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, and in the subsequent crisis the pro-Western Shah of Iran had been forced to flee the country.
The Americans, suspecting Mossadegh of Communist sympathies, organized support for the Shah through the agents of the CIA (Central Intelligence Agency) in Iran, and restored him to his throne.
From then, until his fall from power in 1978, the Shah remained a firm American ally.
In addition, the USA gained a 40% share in Iranian oil.
Dulles went on to form another of his much-favoured regional pacts — the Baghdad Pact (1955), which included the USA, Britain, Iran, Iraq and Pakistan — to build up power around the Soviet defence perimeter.
A notable absentee from the pact was Egypt, whose leader, Colonel Nasser, was attempting to maintain a balance between the two superpowers.
He accepted the offer of American aid for the building of the Aswan High Dam, while at the same time building up trade, especially in arms, with the Soviet bloc in Eastern Europe.
With opposition to the loan mounting in Congress, Eisenhower had second thoughts about the project and suddenly in July 1956, the Americans withdrew their offer.
This action led directly to the Suez Crisis of that year (CORE, pp. 141–3).
When Britain and France, in close collaboration with Israel, launched a military attack on Egypt, the American government was furious.
Washington had been kept completely in the dark over the invasion which, to make matters worse, coincided with the suppression of the Hungarian rising by Soviet tanks.
The Western  alliance appeared to be in total disarray as the USA supported a United Nations resolution calling for a cease-fire in Egypt, which her allies reluctantly accepted.
The damage to the alliance was eventually repaired, but it had been subjected to the most serious strain of the post-war period.
In retrospect, the Americans had a good case for opposing the invasion of Egypt, even if it was difficult to defend the bungling over the Aswan Dam loan that had sparked off the crisis.
So the main American concern after Suez was the obvious possibility of increased Russian influence in the Middle East, taking advantage of the divisions between the Western Allies, Eisenhower moved quickly, and in March 1957, Congress approved a resolution giving the President power to grant economic and military aid to any Middle Eastern power which requested it.
Equipped with the "Eisenhower Doctrine" , as this resolution came to be called, US aid helped to maintain King Hussein of Jordan in power in 1957.
In the following year, American marines landed in the Lebanon after a request from the Lebanese President, whose authority was threatened by an internal struggle between Moslems and Christians.
In other areas the American government was less successful.
Revolutions in Syria (1957) an Iraq (1958) took those countries into the Egyptian camp, with both receiving their main arms supplies from the Soviet bloc.
The defection of Iraq from the Baghdad Pact in 1959 led to its re-establishment as the Central Treaty Organization (CENTO).
Yet, despite the heavy American commitment in the Middle East under the Eisenhower administration, this vitally important area remained highly unstable in 1960.
The United States had always regarded Latin America as its own "backyard" — an area in which US influence, both political and economic, was undisputed.
In the 1950s the perennial problems of unstable governments and widespread poverty that were so typical of the region seemed to provide fertile ground for revolutionary movements — and revolution, in official American eyes, was frequently the agency of international communism.
It was this suspicion that led to American intervention in the Republic of Guatemala in 1954, and the establishment of a pro-American regime there (p. 140).
While the episode revealed the enormous power which the USA could wield in the American hemisphere, such actions provided no permanent solution to the fundamental causes of instability in Latin America — and they led to widespread anti-American feeling.
When Vice-President Nixon toured the area in 1958 he was pelted with rotten eggs and jostled by angry demonstrators.
His response was to report to Eisenhower that "the threat of communism in Latin America is greater than ever." 
In 1959 US attention shifted to Cuba, where the revolutionary movement led by Fidel Castro finally overthrew the repressive government of Batista, dictator since 1933.
Most Americans had few regrets about Batista, but the Eisenhower administration watched Castro carefully.
American businesses controlled most of the island's economy, making profits of $77 million in 1957, and the USA had a large naval base at Guantanamo.
American hopes that Castro would make only gradual changes were quickly dashed.
The extreme poverty of the Cuban people was in stark contrast to the wealth of foreign investors in the country, and Castro began the redistribution of the  land, much of it American-owned, to peasant families (pp. 137).
Sympathy for Castro declined in the USA after a series of televised political trials in Cuba led to the execution of former supporters of Batista.
Relations between the American government and Castro deteriorated.
Washington turned down his request for a loan, so Castro speeded up his land reforms, began to nationalize foreign holdings in Cuba and, to the horror of the Americans, signed an economic agreement with the Soviet Union.
A vicious circle had been created: the more pressure the Americans exerted on Castro, the more inclined he was to move into the arms of the Russians.
In 1960 the USA cut its imports of Cuban sugar, which was the basis of the Cuban economy.
The Russians quickly agreed to increase their purchases of sugar.
Americans now came to see Castro as a threat and Cuba as a potential base for Communist activity throughout Latin America.
In March 1960, Eisenhower approved a CIA plan to train Cuban exiles, hostile to Castro, for an eventual invasion of the island (p. 82).
By 1960 the early optimism of Eisenhower and Dulles about their ability to "roll back" Communist influence had long since evaporated.
The administration had instead settled for a policy of "holding the line" , which basically meant the continuation of containment.
Eisenhower had presided over a period of grim Cold War tension which he, like most Americans, believed had been caused by the ambitions of world communism.
In his farewell address to the American people in January 1961, Eisenhower warned against any attempt to seek some "miraculous solution" to the difficulties the world faced.
He gave a stern warning against the dangers of the arms race.
In particular he referred to the enormous growth of the arms industry in America, which by 1960 directly employed 3.5 million people.
A combination of a large military establishment and a massive arms industry — what Eisenhower called the "military-industrial complex" — could become over-powerful and start to dominate American policy.
Eisenhower was not objecting to the building of strong defence forces, but stressing the need for civilian control over the whole area of defence and foreign policy.
It was a warning all the more impressive for being delivered by an old soldier.
8 John F. Kennedy and the New Frontier, 1960–63
(1) The New Frontier
John Fitzgerald Kennedy was, at 43, the youngest man ever to be elected President of the USA.
In the campaign of 1960, Kennedy generated an excitement and sense of expectation that his more experienced Republican rival, Richard Nixon, was unable to match.
His youthful and handsome appearance and his quick intelligence gave him a "star" quality that was particularly effective in the four televised debates between the candidates, which were watched by 110 million Americans.
His campaign machine, oiled by his immense wealth, was superbly efficient under the management of his brother, Robert.
Moreover, he overcame what many saw as his main problem — his Roman Catholicism — by meeting it head on.
In an address to a potentially hostile assembly of Protestant ministers, he brought up the subject of his religion and emphasized his belief in a strict separation of the affairs of state and those of the church.
Another astute electoral move helped to win 70% of the black vote for Kennedy.
Hearing of the arrest of Martin Luther King in Georgia, he telephoned King's wife to express his sympathy and called for the release of the highly respected civil rights leader.
More generally, Kennedy appealed in his campaign to a need for change, while Nixon relied on his greater experience — as Vice-President since 1952 — and on the record of the Eisenhower administration.
In the end, Kennedy won, but by the narrowest of margins: a popular majority of 118 550 of the 68 million votes cast.
The Democrats had correctly concentrated their efforts on the more heavily-populated states, as was shown by the electoral college victory of 303 to 219.
Like Franklin Roosevelt, Kennedy found a striking phrase: he offered the American people a "New Frontier" of "unknown opportunities and perils" .
Also like Roosevelt, he attracted to Washington the brightest advisers he could find in the universities and the business community to fill places in the Cabinet and to surround him in the White House.
There was an emphasis on younger men: Kennedy's Cabinet had an average age of 47, 10 years younger than Eisenhower's.
New faces emerged in key posts: Robert McNamara, direct from the presidency of the Ford Motor Company, became Secretary for Defense; McGeorge Bundy, an academic, Special Assistant for National Security; and the President's younger brother, Robert, Attorney-General.
The new President was, however, careful to include more experienced men in some key areas, such as Dean Rusk, a long-serving State Department official who became Secretary of State.
A host of able young men filled lesser posts, creating at the time an impression of  energy and drive.
Later critics of the Kennedy era detected a certain arrogance among these "new men" and a lack of clearly worked-out policies; they questioned whether, beneath the impressive style of the administration, there was sufficient substance.
Those who expected the election to lead to a radical change in domestic policy certainly found the first two years of the Kennedy era disappointing.
The new administration moved with surprising caution in such areas as civil rights and social reform.
Its first priority was the economy.
In the campaign, Kennedy pointed to the dangers of a growing recession and had pledged to "move America forward" .
In January 1961, he presented to Congress a batch of measures designed to stimulate the economy and reduce unemployment (then running at almost 7% of the workforce).
His supporters talked of a new "Hundred Days" , although the situation was far less serious than that of 1933 and the measures not as radical.
By mid-1961, Congress had approved an expansion of Social Security and unemployment benefits, a Federally-financed Housing Act for home building, Federal aid to depressed areas, and an increase in minimum wages, first to $1.15 and then to $1.25 per hour.
These measures were "pump-priming" , not a bold new programme, and their value should not be exaggerated.
The recovery of the economy was already under way by the spring of 1961, and probably owed less to the steps mentioned and more to spending on defence and space exploration.
Until the Vietnam War intensified in the middle 1960s, most Americans continued to enjoy considerable affluence.
In attempting to carry out his economic policies the President had frequently met a central problem that was also to obstruct the social reforms he had promised — the difficulty of persuading Congress to pass the necessary legislation.
On paper, the Democrats had comfortable majorities in the House (262–174) and the Senate (65–35); but an alliance of conservative southern Democrats and Republicans blocked the passage of legislation of which they did not approve.
Kennedy lacked experience in handling Congress; he also feared that a clash with Congress on domestic issues might bring problems over foreign affairs too, an area which he always regarded as much more important.
So he failed to achieve two particularly important reforms: "Medicare" and Federal aid to education.
The Medicare scheme proposed medical insurance under the Social Security Act for retired workers over 65 years.
A campaign opposing the scheme was launched by the American Medical Association, who warned of the dangers of "socialized medicine" , and it was defeated in Congress.
Education had always been a matter for state and local government in the USA and now Kennedy was proposing to give over $2 billion to aid schools, plus over $3 billion to higher education.
Fears that this proposal would lead to Federal interference in this field brought a further defeat for the President.
The cautious approach of the Kennedy administration to controversial problems was most clearly revealed in its attitude to civil rights.
In 1961, the President made only a few shadowy and conventional gestures to the black community.
A number of blacks were given government appointments and a Commission on Equal Employment Opportunity was set up under Vice-President Johnson.
Fears of conflict in Congress, particularly with southern Democrats, made Kennedy hesitate to bring forward civil rights legislation.
His hesitation created disillusionment among the blacks whose hopes had been raised by Kennedy's election.
Black leaders were determined to press ahead with their own civil rights campaign in the hope that this would prod the Federal government into action.
In 1961 CORE (p. 67) dispatched a group of "freedom riders" , black and white, to the South to test the Supreme Court decision that restaurants and other facilities at bus stations must not discriminate against interstate travellers.
The freedom riders met with violence in Alabama, and Attorney-General Robert Kennedy sent Federal marshals for their protection.
In 1962, the Federal courts ordered the University of Mississippi, one of the most segregated of states in the deep south, to enrol its first black students, James Meredith.
After a campaign of violence directed by the State Governor, in which two people died, Federal marshals and troops ensured Meredith's enrolment.
In 1963 Kennedy moved to take a more positive role in the struggle for civil rights.
Like many other Americans, the President was horrified by the violence of the latest phase of the struggle for equal rights in the South.
As Martin Luther King led a peaceful demonstration to try to remove segregation in Birmingham, Alabama, his supporters were violently dispersed by the local police.
TV pictures showed Police Commissioner Eugene "Bull" Conor ordering the use of snarling police dogs, high-pressure hoses and electric cattle prods against the demonstrators.
Scenes such as these undermined America's chosen world position as a leader of freedom and at last there were signs that the President and Congress were prepared to strengthen the position of the blacks with positive civil rights laws.
In August 1963 Luther King led a massive march on Washington.
Totally peaceful, the huge crowds heard King's greatest oration, "I have a dream" .
A civil rights bill went before Congress; it was still under debate when Kennedy was assassinated that November.
(2) Foreign Affairs
Kennedy regarded foreign policy as the key area for his new administration.
Whether he had anything new to offer in place of the "stale dogmas of the Cold War" , as he called previous policies, was less clear.
He spoke hopefully in his inaugural address of beginning "anew the quest for peace" , but at the same time emphasized the need to negotiate from a position of strength.
He had claimed in the election campaign that the Eisenhower administration had allowed the USA to fall behind the Soviet Union in the production of nuclear missiles, creating a so-called "missile-gap" .
The "gap" did not in fact exist, as Secretary of Defense, McNamara, later admitted.
Nevertheless, Kennedy committed the USA to a new level of arms production, thoroughly alarming the Russians and inaugurating another phase in the arms race between the superpowers.
The emphasis placed by Kennedy on a manned space programme, designed to put a man on the moon by 1970, was  part of the same desire to push ahead of the Soviet Union.
The triumphs of the Soviet Sputnik 1 in 1957 and, in 1961, of Yuri Gagarin, the first man to orbit the earth, opened a "space gap" between the USSR and the USA.
The three-day orbit of John Glenn in February, 1962, restored American confidence, although the whole programme was enormously costly (involving $24 billion for the Apollo moon programme alone).
Under the new President there was clearly going to be no relaxation of the competition between the two superpowers.
The first excursion of the new government in foreign affairs was a bitter disappointment to those who had expected a real change in American policy abroad.
Kennedy had inherited a plan, drawn up for the Eisenhower administration by the CIA, to remove Fidel Castro from power in Cuba.
The argument behind the plan was simple.
Castro, though the legitimate ruler of Cuba, had moved into the Communist camp; Cuba was in America's "backyard" ; and so any means might be employed to remove him.
Cuban refugees, trained by the Americans, were to invade the island and set off a spontaneous rising of the Cuban people against Castro.
Kennedy decided to go ahead with the plan.
It proved a total fiasco.
The Cuban exile forces landed at the Bay of Pigs (17 April 1961), but no rising took place and Castro's forces easily rounded up the invaders.
Castro scored a great propaganda victory as the official American role in training the exile force, and in providing it with air cover in unmarked planes, became clear.
With this unhappy enterprise fresh in their minds, Kennedy and Khrushchev met in Vienna in June 1961.
The Russian leader took a tough line with a President he felt to be inexperienced.
He wanted a settlement of the long-standing problem of Berlin, demanding a treaty recognizing the division of Germany between east and west and the internationalization of the city (CORE, p. 153).
If such an agreement was not forthcoming, the Russians would go ahead and sign a treaty with East Germany, a state not recognized by the USA.
Berlin was a sensitive issue on which Kennedy felt he had to stand firm.
So in July he announced to the American public: "we intend to honour our commitments" (to West Germany and West Berlin) and called for a build-up of American forces.
Khrushchev's reaction was even more dramatic: on 13 August he ordered the building of a physical barrier between East and West Berlin, the Berlin Wall.
But the crisis receded and Khrushchev abandoned his plan to sign a separate treaty with East Germany.
Neither side had "won" ; the status of Berlin remained the same but it was a city now starkly divided.
Another consequence of the crisis was the resumption, first by the USSR and then by the Americans, of nuclear tests in the atmosphere.
This uneasy stalemate between the superpowers was dramatically disturbed in October 1962 when definite evidence reached President Kennedy that the Russians were installing nuclear missiles in Cuba (CORE, pp. 154–6).
On 14 October US reconnaissance planes provided photographs of the missile sites under construction.
Kennedy immediately called together a special Executive Committee (the "Ex Comm" ) to advice him on the handling of the crisis.
From the start Kennedy decided that the missiles must be removed whatever the consequences.
No President could have accepted the presence of Soviet missiles on an island only 145 kilometres  from the American mainland.
 "I would have been impeached" , said Kennedy.
The decisions taken during the 13 days of crisis were momentous; as Kennedy and those around him realized, one false move would lead to nuclear war.
The Ex Comm considered a series of options.
Diplomatic negotiations were rejected outright as insufficiently forceful.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff favoured a "surgical airstrike" that would pinpoint air raids on the missile launching sites.
The airforce could not guarantee such accuracy, and   Russian technicians as well as Cuban civilians might be killed, so this idea too was rejected.
Instead, the Ex Comm settled for a naval blockade of the island, coupled with a demand for the withdrawal of the missiles.
The President announced this action and explained its background to a startled nation over nationwide television on 22 October.
Khrushchev's first reaction to the naval quarantine was to denounce it as "outright banditry" ; but two days later he halted five ships outside the quarantine zone and sent Kennedy a letter offering to remove the missiles in return for a public pledge that the USA would not invade Cuba.
This conciliatory letter was followed by a sterner message which added a new condition: that the Americans should also remove their missiles from Turkey.
Robert Kennedy, who played a notable role throughout the crisis, suggested that the President should ignore this second letter and reply to the first in the affirmative.
This was done and, when Khrushchev accepted the reply, the crisis was over.
The crisis could be seen as a triumph for President Kennedy.
He had stood firm and the missiles had been removed.
No one could doubt his ability to keep cool in a crisis and to restrain those around him who wanted to take more extreme action, like the Chiefs of Staff.
The crisis secured his reputation as President and earned him immense popularity with the American people.
But he had taken enormous risks.
For several days the world had been on the brink of nuclear war — and over an issue that appeared less than vital for those outside the conflict.
Both Kennedy and Khrushchev appeared to have been chastened by the experience, and the next 12 months saw a thaw in relations between the USA and the USSR.
They agreed to establish a "hot line" telephone link between the White  House and the Kremlin, and in July 1963 concluded a nuclear test ban treaty, ruling out atmospheric tests.
The crisis-ridden years of 1961–2 had dampened the optimism of those who had hoped for new initiatives to end the Cold War.
One area where the Kennedy administration had started out with great hopes was the Third World.
This was illustrated by the creation of the Peace Corps under the leadership of Kennedy's brother-in-law, Sargent Shriver.
Young American volunteers were to be encouraged to serve in underdeveloped countries as teachers, agricultural scientists, medical helpers and the like.
Good results followed, yet it was a gesture, rather than a real solution to the manifold social and economic problems of the Third World.
In such areas as Latin America (pp. 142–3), Africa and Asia, competition with the Communist world to secure the dominant influence remained the chief consideration for Washington.
Governments continued to be aided or opposed according to their stance in the Cold War.
Nowhere was this clearer than in Vietnam, where the legacy of the Kennedy era was a vastly expanded United States commitment (pp. 95–100).
(3) The Assassination of President Kennedy
In November 1963, President Kennedy visited Texas to help unite the warring factions in the Democratic Party in that key southern state.
Riding  with his wife in an open car through Dallas, he was shot in the neck and head by an assassin.
Lee Harvey Oswald, subsequently arrested for the murder, was a man with a strange past.
A 24-year-old ex-marine, he had lived in Russia for nearly three years and, since returning to America, had joined a  pro-Castro group.
Oswald denied the killing.
Two days later, as he was being moved to a new jail, he was himself shot in full view of millions of TV viewers by a small-time gambler, Jack ruby.
The people of America and throughout the world were stunned and grief-stricken by the President's assassination.
Only later was a full investigation made of the events in Dallas by a commission under Chief Justice Earl Warren, which produced 26 volumes of evidence.
It concluded that Kennedy was shot by Oswald acting alone, a verdict which has been questioned ever since by those believing that he must have been acting as part of a conspiracy.
The circumstances of John Kennedy's death have made a cool assessment of his "Thousand Days" as President difficult to achieve.
The style of the presidency, shown by the liveliness of the White House, refurbished by Kennedy's elegant young wife, Jacqueline, is in no doubt.
But the substance of his achievements has been the subject of considerable controversy.
Kennedy's record in domestic affairs was unimpressive; he had moved only slowly and cautiously in disputed areas, especially civil rights.
In foreign affairs, his stance was basically that of the "cold warrior" ; expectations of real change had not been realized.
After the Cuban missile crisis, however, there appeared signs of a greater maturity and moderation in external policies and a growing decisiveness at home.
Any President has difficulty making a substantial impact even in a full term, and Kennedy tragically had only three years in the highest office.
9 Lyndon Johnson and the Great Society, 1963–8
(1) From John F. Kennedy to Lyndon B. Johnson
Only hours after Kennedy's death, Lyndon Baines Johnson was sworn in as President on board the presidential aircraft, Air Force One.
There could hardly have been a greater contrast than that between Kennedy and his successor.
A large man with a strong Texan drawl and a fund of earthy stories, Lyndon B. Johnson had kept a homely, "folksey" image from his early poverty and farming background through a political career stretching 30 years.
Entering Congress as a New Dealer in 1937, he had built a reputation as a supreme operator in congressional politics.
As Democratic majority leader in the Senate between 1954 and 1960, he had perfected the "Johnson treatment" , a technique that was to be of immense value to him in the presidency.
He would cajole, flatter and persuade congressmen to support him by using his wide knowledge of their attitudes, constituencies, prejudices and personal backgrounds.
He had observed Franklin Roosevelt at close quarters and absorbed many of his techniques.
But Johnson also had his weaknesses.
Under the genial exterior lay a considerable vanity, and a desire to have his own way.
His generosity to his friends was matched by  vindictiveness to those who fell out of his favour.
In addition, he lacked experience in the vital sphere of foreign affairs.
Johnson's first task was to ensure a smooth transition of power, and for the time being he kept together the Kennedy team.
He was determined to become President in his own right, and he had a year in which to establish his fitness for the office.
He decided to use his experience in domestic affairs allied to a frank appeal to the emotional impact of the late President's death, to press Congress to pass a series of important measures.
Addressing Congress five days after the assassination, he hit exactly the right note: "Let us here highly resolve that J.F. Kennedy did not live or die in vain." 
He called upon Congress to pass two key Kennedy measures still lingering in committee — the tax cuts and the civil rights bill.
Further, he appealed for action in a field he wished to make his own, the "war on poverty" .
The "Johnson treatment" produced immediate results; both the tax cuts and the civil rights legislation reached the statute book in 1964.
A third major act, the Economic Opportunity Act, tackled the problems of the underprivileged and became the cornerstone of Johnson's domestic programme in the 1964 election.
All that programme needed now was a suitable label, and Johnson found it: he would create a "Great Society" .
Johnson had steered himself into a position of strength from which to conduct his campaign in the election of 1964.
He had created a broad consensus among significant groups of Americans in support of a fairer society.
He then received a bonus from an unexpected quarter — the Republican Party.
In their efforts to present a clear-cut conservative alternative to the liberal Democrats, the Republicans chose a candidate from the far right wing of the party, Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona.
It was a grave miscalculation of the mood the country.
Supported by extremist groups like the John Birch Society, Goldwater, who had voted against both Civil Rights and the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, alarmed large sections of the electorate.
Johnson found it easy to represent his opponent as the enemy of the underprivileged at home and a warmonger abroad; and he swept to victory by one of the largest margins in American history — 43 million votes to 27 million, and 44 states to six.
With an increased Democratic majority in Congress, the President could rightly claim a massive mandate for his Great Society programmes.
(2) The Great Society: Triumph and Frustration, 1964–9
Lyndon Johnson, with an old New Dealer's instinctive sympathy for the poor, was determined to produce new and imaginative programmes to eliminate poverty from American society.
Public attention had been drawn to this issue in the early 1960s.
Reports and books, such as Michael Harrington's The Other America, had vividly described the plight of the underprivileged.
Harrington wrote sympathetically of the plight of the blacks, American Indians and other minorities, of poor white farmers and of workers in depressed areas like the Appalachian Mountains.
The Council of Economic  Advisers produced startling figures: 9.3 million (20%) of Americans were living below a poverty line drawn at the income of $3000 a year.
This poverty was all the worse for the general affluence around it, and until now it had been little noticed by the majority.
Using the Economic Opportunity Act as a base, Johnson appointed the Peace Corps Director, Sargent Shriver, as head of the Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO) with a budget of $1 billion.
The emphasis of the "war on poverty" was placed on self-help, backed by Federal government finance.
A massive range of policies included a Job Opportunities scheme for the long-term unemployed; "Head Start" to provide pre-school education for poor children; "Upward Bound" to provide college places for the poor; adult literacy programmes; Volunteers for Service in America, a type of domestic peace corps; Neighbourhood Youth Corps to provide part-time jobs.
One of the terms of the Economic Opportunity Act required "the maximum feasible participation" of the poor in all programmes.
This clause, largely unnoticed during the passage of the act, led to the setting up of the controversial Community Action Programme (CAP).
Community action agencies, run by boards elected from the residents of poor communities, were set up to administer many of the "war on poverty" schemes.
Relations of CAP leaders and regular local government officials were often difficult, and critics saw it as giving an open invitation to agitators.
But for many of the poor, CAP provided the first opportunity to participate in decisions which vitally affected their lives.
The results of all this activity are difficult to assess.
Johnson later claimed that over 12 million Americans had been lifted from the poverty trap.
Total spending on the poor certainly rose from $13.4 billion in 1964 to $23.9 billion in 1969.
Yet general prosperity was rising too, and unemployment was falling anyway.
Great strides had been made, but the elimination of poverty, Johnson's ultimate aim, was far from complete.
The programmes also came under increasing criticism as a traditional American dislike of "hand outs" reasserted itself.
One leading Republican called OEO "the greatest boondoggle since bread and circuses in the days of the ancient Roman Empire" .
The war on poverty was only one part of the Great Society programme.
In two other important areas, Johnson succeeded where Kennedy had failed.
At last, in 1965, Medicare passed through Congress, along with a new scheme, Medicaid.
Medicare provided those over 65 with 80% of the fees for hospital treatment; Medicaid helped to cover the medical expenses of the poor.
In that year too, Johnson secured an Education Act, providing $1.5 billion of Federal aid for elementary and secondary schools, including those run by religious denominations.
By focusing on the educational needs of the poor, the act avoided the religious controversy that killed its proposals under Kennedy.
Further, a Housing Act directed at those on low incomes provided subsidies for public housing, and a group of acts tried to improve urban living conditions, reduce pollution, strengthen consumer protection and promote the conservation of areas of great natural beauty.
Altogether the Johnson Administration claimed to have seen 226 out of 252 pieces of major legislation through Congress in its four years.
It was a mighty effort to expand and complete a process of reform that had its roots in the New Deal.
But its full success depended on the ability of the Johnson government to maintain massive expenditure on all the projects started.
Unhappily, the all-pervasive Vietnam War was upsetting the economy and draining away vital resources throughout the four years.
A clear link existed between the attempt to raise the standards of the least privileged and that most thorny of all American issues, race.
Johnson, as a southerner know that in spite of winning 90% of the black vote in 1964, he would be minutely scrutinized by civil rights leaders for any sign of hesitation in this area.
Less worried than Kennedy by the inevitable opposition of southern white  politicians , Johnson plunged into the fray and pressed through the Civil Rights Act of 1964 in the face of prolonged southern senatorial opposition.
The Act barred racial discrimination in public places, such as theatres, restaurants and hotels; blocked funds from Federally-assisted projects where discrimination existed; required companies and unions to provide equal employment opportunities; and removed some barriers to voting.
The right of the blacks to vote was the focus of a campaign led by Martin Luther King in 1965.
He chose the city of Selma, Alabama, to dramatize the issue — a city where the blacks outnumbered whites, but where only 3% of blacks were registered voters against 97% of the white inhabitants.
Scenes similar to those of 1963 in Birmingham, Alabama, sickened television viewers as the local sheriff confronted the peaceful demonstrators demanding the vote.
Peace was once again only secured by the despatch of Federal marshals, and Johnson immediately pressed Congress for a Voting Rights Act.
Passed five months later, the act appointed "examiners" to register voters and eliminate literacy tests and other devices used to prevent blacks from voting.
The patience of the black people, however, was running out and Selma was the last major victory for the non-violent tactics of Martin Luther King.
The character of the black protest movement was changing.
There was less emphasis on integration into a white-dominated society and more on the need to define a black "identity" based on black culture and black values.
Stokely Carmichael of the SNCC, one of the emerging radical leaders, summarized these ideas in a single phrase: "What we want," he said, is "black power" , and this became the slogan of the more militant black movements from 1966.
Tension between the races was increasing for two main reasons.
First, the strain of maintaining Martin Luther King's advice to "turn the other cheek" was becoming too great to bear in the face of continued attacks and insults.
Secondly, the high expectations aroused by civil rights legislation had been disappointed; the conditions of most blacks continued to show little material improvement.
So the civil rights movement began to splinter, and young blacks in particular followed more militant leaders.
The Black Muslims, founded in the 1930s grew fast in the 1960s; their most celebrated recruit was Muhammed Ali, the world heavyweight boxing champion.
They saw salvation not in integration but in the setting up of "blacks only" states.
Malcolm X, a reformed criminal and former Black  Muslim, urged blacks to strike back if they were attacked.
Many of the urban young were attracted to the para-military uniform of the Black Panthers, formed in 1966.
Racial tension boiled over in the inner city riots which spread across the  nation in the "long hot summers" of 1965–7.
They began in August 1965, in the slums of Watts, a district of Los Angeles.
Here, in five days of rioting and looting, 34 people died and much of the area was laid to waste by fire.
Over the next two years many of the large cities experienced riots, and in the worst-hit, Detroit, 43 died, thousands were injured and 4700 paratroops were needed to restore order.
Altogether the riots cost 130 lives and well over $700 million in property.
A Commission under Governor Kerner of Illinois placed the blame squarely on white racism and on the social and economic inequalities which were its direct results.
Police harassment, which often sparked off the riots, was noted as an almost inevitable feature of life in these crime-ridden ghetto areas.
The Commission recommended massive improvement in housing welfare, education and job opportunities.
But many white Americans were more concerned about the breakdown of law and order, and Congress reflected this view by refusing to grant funds for an elimination of ghetto conditions.
Johnson's hopes of further progress in civil rights were frustrated by the "white backlash" — the growing hostility of many white people as the cities burned and the realities of integration became clear.
Sympathy for the general aims of civil rights legislation turned to hostility when it affected people's everyday lives.
For example, to carry out legal decisions on school integration in the northern cities, it was proposed that children should be "bussed" — white children to predominantly black schools and black children to the white areas, in order to achieve the required racial mix.
This was very unpopular with the middle-class whites.
Similar attempts to end discrimination in jobs and housing also created new stresses between the races.
Between 1966 and 1968 the consensus of which Johnson had been so proud was rapidly disintegrating.
Violence and division seemed to be taking its place.
Johnson's legislative record was enormously impressive, but the Great Society remained more a vision than a reality.
The story might have been different but for the Vietnam War.
That struggle took up ever more of the government's attention — and ever more of its resources.
Johnson's contention that the USA was rich enough to provide both "guns and butter" was over-optimistic.
Worse, the effects of the war spilled over into almost every aspect of American life, leaving bitterness and division in their wake.
10 The Vietnam War
(1) The Origins of the War (1945–60)
For over two decades, the USA sought to prevent the spread of communism in South-East Asia from the footholds it had acquired by the early 1950s in China and North Vietnam (CORE, pp. 156–7).
The aim of successive American administrations had been to build up the strength of the most vulnerable states in the area — those known until the Second World War as French Indo-China and later divided into the separate states of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.
All those administrations had subscribed to the "domino theory" : the non-Communist countries were seen as a set of dominoes, and if one was knocked over (i.e. went Communist) then the others would also tumble.
Truman had made the first move in South-East Asia at the time of the Korean War, sending financial and other aid to the French government, by then engaged in a desperate attempt to maintain their control of Indo-China.
The heart of the struggle was in Vietnam where nationalist forces, known as the Vietminh, were attempting to gain independence.
Their leader, Ho Chi Minh, as the Americans noted, had been politically trained in Moscow, and his armies were supplied with weapons provided by the Communists.
A crisis came in 1954 when the French army was trapped by the nationalists in the fortress town of Dien Bien Phu, in North Vietnam (AA, pp. 124–5).
The Eisenhower administration considered, but rejected, the idea of military intervention; instead they awaited the outcome of an international conference which met at Geneva in April 1954.
But in May, Dien Bien Phu fell, and France withdrew from Indo-China.
It was decided at Geneva to make Laos and Cambodia independent; to divide Vietnam into two, with the North under the Vietminh and the South under a separate government; and to hold elections in both areas to produce a government for a united Vietnam.
But the Americans, unhappy at the outcome of the conference, set out to build up South Vietnam as a bastion against communism.
They supported the fanatically anti-Communist Prime Minister of South Vietnam, Ngo Dinh Diem, and supplied him with military and economic aid.
In September 1954, John Foster Dulles created the South-East Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO), hoping to bring in allies to defend South-East Asia against communism.
The treaty was signed by the USA, Britain, France, Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, Pakistan and the Philippines.
Unlike NATO, SEATO did not require the supply of troops by its members at times of crisis; it relied instead on America's deterrent power.
Henceforward the Americans became involved in the fate of South  Vietnam, tying their fortunes to those of the Diem government.
Diem proved a harsh dictator, using American aid to remove opposition, all of which depicted as Communist, and in 1956 he refused to hold the elections stipulated at Geneva.
Resistance to his rule increased inside South Vietnam; and in 1958 came the first ominous trickle of men and weapons   from North Vietnam.
Convinced that the Chinese communists were supplying the Vietcong (Communist guerrillas of South Vietnam), the Eisenhower administration increased its aid to Diem and sent several hundred "advisers" to organize the army of South Vietnam, though the President drew back from a full commitment of US forces.
(2) Escalation under Kennedy and Johnson (1961–9)
The election of a new President offered the opportunity for a review of American policy in South-East Asia.
But Kennedy took much the same view of the area as his predecessor, accepting a domino theory and remaining absolutely determined to prevent the fall of South Vietnam to the Communists.
He believed that such an event would lead to a loss of belief in the will of the USA to maintain her commitments throughout the area.
The President knew well that Diem's rule was both repressive and corrupt, but the idea of an alternative government made up of members of the opposition National Liberation Front (NLF) and including some Communists was rejected by the Americans.
Kennedy concentrated on the deteriorating military situation.
A report in 1961 suggested that the administration send 6000–8000 troops to halt the Vietcong successes, but Kennedy rejected the advice, saying"It's like taking a drink.
The effect wears off, and you have to take another."
Instead he sent increased numbers of "advisers" to train the South Vietnamese in the arts of "counter-insurgency" , believing that guerilla tactics could be met successfully by expert groups like the Green Berets.
By 1963 there were 16,000 such advisers.
Meanwhile, military spokesmen made optimistic statements, based on "head counts" of the Vietcong dead — whereas independent journalists on the spot reported little or no military progress and emphasized the widespread opposition within the country to the Diem regime.
In November 1963, South Vietnamese army leaders carried out a successful coup, murdering Diem, and his hated brother, Nhu.
But the generals were little more effective or popular as rulers than Diem, and the political problems of Vietnam remained unsolved.
Kennedy's assassination less than a month after that of Diem left an unhappy heritage in South-East Asia for his successor Lyndon Johnson.
The words of Johnson's wife, Ladybird, have a cruel irony: "I just hope that foreign problems do not keep mounting they do not represent Lyndon's kind of presidency." 
His lack of experience in foreign affairs, as well as a tendency to act hastily, was revealed also when he sent US Marines and the 82nd Airborne into the Dominican Republic in 1965 (p. 139).
Johnson took an over-simplified view of the world, dividing it merely into those for and those against communism.
He accepted his country's crusading role in South Vietnam, and looked only for ways of bringing about "victory" .
He kept the Kennedy men in key positions, all of them convinced that the USA was following the correct policy: Dean Rusk at State, Robert McNamara at Defense and McGeorge Bundy as Special Adviser.
Most Americans shared the view of the administration, and in the election campaign of 1964 Johnson deliberately played down the issue of Vietnam, anxious to contrast his moderation with the sabre-rattling of his opponent  Barry Goldwater.
He gave no indication that he would "escalate" the war; yet, almost unnoticed, he took in August 1964 a major step towards a full commitment in Vietnam.
Two American destroyers, the Maddox and the C. Turner Joy, were attacked by North Vietnamese boats in the Gulf of Tonkin.
Without revealing that both ships had been secretly assisting South Vietnamese commando raids on the North, Johnson called upon Congress to pass a resolution granting him sweeping powers to act against North Vietnam.
The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution authorized the President "to take all necessary steps to repel any armed attack against the forces of the USA." 
The House passed this by 416–0, and the Senate by 88–2, and Johnson constantly used it later when he stepped up American involvement in Vietnam.
Later critics of the President believed that the resolution would have run into much more opposition if all the facts had been known.
A feeling grew that Johnson was too often less than frank with the public and Congress, and the newspapers began to talk of a "credibility gap" over his policy.
Plans for the extension of the war in Vietnam had existed for some time in the Pentagon.
They awaited the President's decision, and in February 1965 this came, after a Vietcong attack on an American advisers"base at  Pleiku in South Vietnam.
Johnson immediately approved a plan, code-named Rolling Thunder, which launched bombing raids on North Vietnam.
The objectives were to hit the main source of supplies to the Vietcong and to undermine the morale of the North Vietnamese people.
But hopes that the bombing would bring the North to the conference table proved totally unfounded; instead, Ho Chi Minh sent detachments of his regular army into the South.
Moreover, fears for the safety of US air bases led in the spring of 1965 to the most fateful decision of all: to commit large forces of American ground troops to bolster the South Vietnamese army.
Kennedy's earlier warning now proved correct.
A process had begun that would be increasingly difficult to reverse.
General Westmoreland, the American commander in Vietnam, soon called for further reinforcements, claiming that peace was "just around the corner" .
The number of US troops rose to 185 000 by the end of 1965; to 400 000 by the end of 1966; and eventually to over half a million.
Meanwhile the full and horrifying battery of modern welfare, stopping short only at nuclear weapons, was exposed to a world audience in this, the first "televised war" .
The use of chemical defoliants to strip guerrilla fighters of their jungle cover and the scorching of human flesh by napalm left an indelible impression on the human mind.
Johnson's cherished consensus was shattered by the rise of a strong and widespread anti-war movement and the appearance of deep divisions in American society.
Student protests, sweeping through the nation's campuses, gave a lead to the opponents of the war.
Beginning with relatively  peaceful "teach-ins" at which the issues raised by the war were debated, the movement grew, using marches, rallies and sit-ins, designed to disrupt recruitment for the armed services.
Its leaders were often student radicals, members of groups like the SDS (Students for a Democratic Society); but the wave of protest took in many young people who would not normally have got involved in politics.
Johnson dismissed the student protesters with their chant of"Hey, hey, hey, LBJ!
How many kids did you kill today? "as" long-haired peaceniks", who enjoyed the security that was guaranteed by American servicemen in areas like Vietnam.
He claimed that the most "ordinary" Americans supported his Vietnam policy.
Certainly the majority of people believed that the USA was right to try to prevent a Communist take-over in South Vietnam.
Yet there was also growing disquiet about the evident failure to bring a quick resolution of the war, and even more threatening for Johnson's political support, a feeling amongst working people that they were being asked to make the heaviest sacrifices.
Exemptions from selective service were far more easily gained by the wealthy and influential than by working-class families, and as the casualty lists grew, it was the latter who were being most affected.
From 1966 until he left office in 1968, Johnson's personal approval rating with the American people stayed below 50%.
At the centre of political power, Johnson depended on his ability to retain the confidence of Congress over Vietnam; and here also the overwhelming support, revealed in 1964  over the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, began to break up.
Johnson, at his most petty when opposed by former supporters, refused to invite even old friends to the White House if they betrayed any doubts about the war.
The number of "doves" (those calling for a settlement of the war) continued to rise.
But in Johnson's inner circle of advisers, there were fewer defections.
Only Robert McNamara of the top team had real doubts, but he did not make them public.
He eventually resigned quietly early in 1968.
The crisis which brought a significant change to American policy in Vietnam came in January 1968.
The Vietcong then launched a massive New Year offensive, attacking towns and cities throughout the South, including the suburbs of Saigon itself.
The claims of the army, that the Vietcong were too weak to launch a major attack, were shown to be quite unjustified.
Westmoreland called for an additional 206 000 men, but the request was turned down and in March he was relieved of his command.
Johnson called a meeting of all the most experienced foreign policy and military leaders in the nation, officially known as the Senior Informal Advisory Group, unofficially called "the Wise Men" .
The President hopes for renewed support but was shocked by their verdict — that the present policy had reached stalemate, that a drastic change of direction was required, and that the war no longer commanded the support of the citizens of the USA.
Reluctantly, Johnson accepted their advice, and on 31 March 1968 he made a dramatic appearance on nationwide television to announce a fresh peace initiative, the reduction of bombing raids on North Vietnam, and his decision not to stand for re-election in November.
His political position in the Democratic Party had already been challenged: an anti-war candidate, Senator Eugene McCarthy, had run him a very close second in the New Hampshire primary, and Robert Kennedy had entered the race for the Democratic nomination.
The worries of Ladybird Johnson about her husband's health (he had suffered heart attacks before becoming president) were a factor in his withdrawal; but it was the unsolved problem of Vietnam that was decisive in making up the President's mind.
The remaining months of Johnson's term of office were marred by continuing strife and violence at home.
Two assassinations appalled both American and overseas opinion: the murder of Martin Luther King in April 1968 was followed by that of Robert Kennedy by a young Jordanian, Sirhan Sirhan, in June.
At a stormy Democratic Party convention in Chicago, Johnson"s Vice-President, Hubert Humphrey, eventually gained nomination as its presidential candidate.
But the spectre of Vietnam haunted the convention, as anti-war protesters were brutally handled by Chicago Mayor Daley's police.
In the election in November both candidates indicated that they would seek an honourable settlement of the Vietnam impasse.
The Republicans who again nominated Richard Nixon, won narrowly, with 31.8 million votes (43.4%) to 31.3 million (42.7%).
(3) Nixon and the Long Withdrawal, 1969–73
Not until the beginning of his second administration in 1973 was Nixon able to announce the end of the Vietnam War.
There was, however, a steady reduction of American troops from 1969; the almost half a million men had  by 1973 been cut down to just over 20 000.
An abrupt withdrawal was ruled out as too obvious an admission of defeat.
Instead Nixon claimed to be "Vietnamizing" the war by a phased withdrawal, which gradually handed over the conduct of the war to the South Vietnamese themselves.
To lend some credibility to his policy, Nixon continued to bomb North Vietnam openly.
In secret he extended the raids into Cambodia in an attempt to interrupt the flow of men and supplies from North Vietnam (the Vietcong had long used the Ho Chi Minh trail through Cambodia for this purpose).
The raids were followed by a military action on the ground, and neutral Cambodia was drawn into the conflict, with appalling loss of life there over the next few years.
This secret expansion of the war was revealed by the press, much to Nixon's fury.
There was an immediate reaction in Congress, which passed bills ordering the President to withdraw American troops from Cambodia and repealing the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution.
For the first time since the beginning of the Vietnam War, Congress had acted decisively to limit the powers of the President in foreign policy.
The sequel was the War Powers Act (1973) under which the President had to inform Congress within 48 hours of committing armed forces abroad; in addition the forces had to be withdrawn unless the action was formally authorized by Congress.
Later bombing raids in Cambodia led Congress to withdraw funds for further action in the area.
The violence in Vietnam continued to permeate the domestic scene, for the Cambodian action led to renewed campus riots.
The nation was shocked when four students were killed and 11 wounded by poorly-organized National Guardsmen at Kent State University, Ohio.
Unpleasant details of the effects of war in Vietnam filtered through: there were stories of servicemen on drugs and of rebellious troops turning on their officers.
In 1971 came the details of the My Lai Massacre, when American troops had killed over 100 civilians in one village.
The fact that atrocities wee also committed by the Vietcong only underlined the "dehumanizing" effects of the war.
There were few Americans who were not relieved when at last, in January 1973, the long-drawn out peace talks in Paris produced a truce.
Nixon's claim that it was an "honourable peace" , leaving the South Vietnamese government in a position to resist further aggression, was quite untrue.
In April 1973 Saigon fell to the North Vietnamese army, and soon all South Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia were in Communist hands.
The Vietnam War had cost the Americans 56 000 dead and 270 000 wounded.
Abroad, and especially in Europe, there was widespread decline in esteem for the USA.
The blend of liberalism and inefficiency which Vietnam revealed contributed to an anti-Americanism that is still strong.
At home the war divided the nation as no previous war had done.
Americans were not at all used to being defeated.
Many, particularly of the younger generation, had become disillusioned not only with the war, but also with the political system that had produced it.
The whole sorry enterprise generated a cynicism that was to be heightened by the Watergate scandal, which emerged as the tragedy of Vietnam was moving to its last stages (p. 104).
The American system was undergoing one of the most testing challenges of its history.
11 The Nixon Presidency, 1969–74
(1) The Domestic Scene (1969–72)
The election of Richard Nixon to the presidency in 1968 was a personal triumph for a man who appeared to have lost the change of the highest office after his defeat in 1960.
 "Tricky Dick" Nixon was an astute party politician, but he had never been able to project an appealing public "image" .
In the campaign of 1968, however, his public relations team claimed the emergence of a "new Nixon" , a man in tune with the nation's mood at a time of crisis.
In foreign affairs, his first priority was to end the Vietnam War, while at home he made a frank appeal to what came to be called "middle america" : the "good, decent, tax-paying, law-abiding people, the forgotten Americans" .
He would offer these people law and order, an end to the inflation caused by the Vietnam War, and a reduction of government interference in their daily lives.
But his statesmanlike calls for unity among the American people were often combined with appeals to the prejudices of "middle America" .
The scapegoats for America's ills were phoney intellectuals, anti-war student demonstrators, black militants, welfare scroungers and the mass media.
Vice-President Spiro Agnew, operating as Nixon's "hatchet man" , delighted in identifying new recruits for this list of "demons" .
The extent of Nixon's belief in such "disruptive influences" later became clear as the Watergate drama unfolded.
At home, Nixon pursued a cautiously conservative programme.
He correctly diagnosed a nation in need of convalescence after the turmoils of recent years.
He met his promise to reduce Federal government activity by transferring responsibility for many welfare and social programmes to the states and the cities.
Under Nixon's "revenue sharing" scheme, money was allocated to the states and they were left to spend it, with many fewer strings attached than in the "Great Society" period.
Critics charged that the change would lead to a greater inequalities in the provision of welfare, but the shift of power back to the states was generally welcomes.
The promise to restore law and order was more difficult to fulfil.
The race riots had run their course by 1968, but violent protests continued on the university campuses as long as the war went on in South-East Asia.
Moreover, criminal violence showed no signs of abating: statistics revealed that in 1972, for example, there was in the United States a murder every 28 minutes, a rape every 11 minutes and a car theft every 36 seconds.
Nixon hoped that a more conservative Supreme Court might back tougher law enforcement methods, and he appointed a mid-western conservative, Warren Burger, as Chief Justice on the retirement of the liberal Earl  Warren.
Yet two other Nixon nominees to the Court were rejected by the Senate, and in general it continued to follow a liberal path on civil rights and individual liberties.
Blacks expected — and got — little from Nixon; only 14% of them had voted Republican in 1968.
There was no outright attack on the civil rights gained so far, but Nixon, mindful of the white "backlash" in 1968, spoke out against some of the more unpopular results of greater racial equality, such as the bussing of school-children.
Many blacks remained far from contented, yet two factors helped the President's effort to quieten the racial issue.
One was the real gain made by blacks under the Johnson legislation, the other the weaknesses created in the blacks"own ranks by divisions in their leadership between moderates and militants.
As the 1972 election drew near, the Nixon administration could point to some genuine success in calming the passions of the Johnson years.
The Vietnam War really appeared to be near its end, and the economy, shaken by the rise in world oil prices and the inflation produced by the war, seemed to be on the mend.
The Democrats, by contrast, were in disarray.
The possibility of another Kennedy candidacy disappeared amidst a scandal in 1969, and their eventual choice, Senator George McGovern of South Dakota, divided the party.
McGovern appealed to the young, anti-war, reforming wing, while the hardened professionals would have preferred a "safe" candidate like Hubert Humphrey.
McGovern was easily depicted by Nixon as both "radical" and unreliable.
Even a break-in (17 June 1972) at the Democratic headquarters in the Watergate Building in Washington failed to give the McGovern campaign real momentum.
Described by Nixon as "a third-rate burglary" , this incident seemed destined to become a mere footnote in history.
In November the Nixon-Agnew ticket swept to victory by 47 million votes to 29 million: only Massachusetts and the District of Columbia went to the Democrats.
(2) Nixon's "special Area" : Foreign Affairs, 1969–74
President Nixon felt that his main task lay in foreign affairs, and his period in office saw notable changes in the direction of American foreign policy.
He appointed a German-born Harvard professor of international relations, Henry Kissinger, as special adviser on National Security Affairs, and these two men dominated American international relations for the next six years.
With the war in Vietnam in mind, Nixon's first step was to review the role of the USA across the world.
He concluded that the country had become over-extended in its global commitments, and announced a new approach.
This "Nixon Doctrine" was outlines in a speech at Guam in the Pacific in July 1969.
While the USA would continue to sustain a world role, there were limits to what could be expected.
The United States  "cannot — and will not — conceive all the plans, design all the programmes, execute all the decisions and undertake all the defence of the free nations of the world…" 
America's allies would be expected to make a greater contribution to their own defence.
Events after 1969 shows that Nixon intended to continue the use of America's great influence and power; but there were to be no more Vietnams.
In practice, Latin America (p. 142) and, above all, the Middle East saw a vigorous use of American strength.
In the period following the Yom Kippur War (1973), the Nixon-Kissinger team scored one of its most impressive diplomatic successes, as Kissinger's "shuttle diplomacy" brought a new understanding with Egypt's President Sadat and hopes of better Arab-Israeli relations in the future (CORE, p. 146).
Yet the major achievement of the Nixon period was the improvement in relations with the Communist powers through the policy of "d  e tente" , the deliberate lowering of tension.
Nixon, one of the fiercest anti-Communists and "cold warriors" of the 1940s and 1950s, knew that he could not easily be accused of being "soft" on communism when he tried to lessen tension with Russia and with Communist China.
He realized that the world had changed and that each side was capable of destroying the other in a nuclear holocaust.
He also saw that the Communist powers were themselves divided and that diplomacy might be used to exploit this situation.
So Nixon sent Henry Kissinger secretly to China to open the way for a personal visit from the President and thus, for the first time since 1949, to recognize the Communist government in that country.
China was now a nuclear power and, Nixon maintained, it was essential that she be brought into the "community of nations" .
An agreement with China could also ease the American way out of Vietnam, bring new markets for American goods, set  up a new element in the balance of world power, and discourage the Soviet Union from a possible attack on China at a time when Sino-Russian relations were at their lowest point (CORE, p. 168).
In February 1972, Nixon himself went to China to set the seal on the new relationship.
The USA dropped its long-standing opposition to China's membership of UNO, though it continued also to recognize the government of Taiwan, and trade agreements were signed.
Nixon had brought off an imaginative stroke in foreign policy.
He followed it up by further personal diplomacy, this time with Russia.
In May 1972, Nixon visited Russia and in June 1973 the Russian President Brezhnev went to Washington.
These visits helped to create an atmosphere in which more solid agreements could be reached, especially over disarmament where both sides were feeling the strain of ever-increasing defence budgets.
In April 1972 the USSR and the USA signed the first Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT 1) which put a "freeze" on a specified range of nuclear weapons.
This treaty was deliberately linked with a number of other areas of mutual co-operation: notably increased trade, joint programmes in space, exchanges in scientific information, and cultural relations.
 "D  e tente" was the most significant achievement of the Nixon-Kissinger team.
But by 1973, even in foreign affairs Nixon came to find his authority increasingly undermined by pressures of a quite different kind — by allegations at home of a misuse of presidential power on an unprecedented scale.
(3) The Watergate Scandal, 1972–4
On 17 June 1972, five men were arrested while attempting to break into the headquarters of the Democratic Party's National Committee in the plush Washington apartment block called the Watergate Building.
Their aim was to  install electronic "bugging" devices, and it was quickly established that one of the men, James McCord, was an official of the Republican "Committee to Re-elect the President" (CRP or, as it was soon re-christened, CREEP).
Two accomplices, Howard Hunt and Gordon Liddy, also worked for CRP.
This link with an organization that operated directly from the White House raised a disturbing question — where had the authority for the break-in originated?
Before the election in November 1972, Nixon stated that no one in the White House knew anything of the plan; and there the matter rested until the Watergate burglars went on trial in January 1973 before Judge Sirica in Washington.
The defendants all stated that the burglary was Liddy's own idea, and not authorized by CRP to whose funds he had access for "legitimate" purposes.
neither Judge Sirica nor a number of pressmen at the trial were satisfied by this story.
Two reporters in particular, Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward of the Washington Post, had already begun an investigation which convinced them that the operation had been planned by officials much higher up than Liddy; and even more important, that a deliberate attempt  was being made in the White House to cover up the whole matter.
They were, in fact, probing towards the central issue of the Watergate affair: not who planned it, but who knew about it from the start and who had ordered the cover-up.
As their investigation progressed, so did their conviction that it was the President himself who was at the heart of the deception.
The true story emerged slowly during 1973.
Judge Sirica's doubts were confirmed when McCord admitted in March that the defendants had lied at the trial, that they had received payments of over $200 000 to keep quiet and that this had been done from a high level in the White House.
Since February, a Senate Committee, chaired by the aged but incorruptible Senator Sam Ervin of North Carolina, had been investigating the affair in the full glare of the television cameras.
The net was closing in on the White House.
McCord's revelations led to the first crack in the united front amongst Nixon's officials.
Two of them, John Dean and Jeb Magruder, told of their part in a cover-up, implicating each other and further members of Nixon's intimate White House circle.
The President was forced to admit on 17 April that there had been "major developments in the case" and that all previous White House statements were "inoperative" .
On 30 April, Dean was dismissed and Bob Haldeman, Chief of Staff at the White House, and John Ehrlichman, Assistant to the President on Domestic Affairs, both resigned.
These two men, known because of their German-sounding names as Nixon's "Prussion Guards" were his closest associates.
If they were  implicated in the cover-up it seemed inconceivable that the President had been unaware of what was going on.
Yet Nixon continued to maintain his innocence: on 22 May, he stated that "I took no part in, nor was I aware of any subsequent effort that may have been made to cover up Watergate." 
He appointed a special prosecutor, Archibald Cox, to investigate the affair.
The turning point came in July 1973, when a White House official almost accidentally let it be known that tape recordings had regularly been made of all conversations conducted by the President in the White House.
The last phase of the Watergate scandal consisted of a prolonged battle between the President and those investigating the case over possession of these tapes.
Nixon claimed that as President he had special executive privileges which allowed him to refuse access to the tapes.
The Sony machines, which were activated by the sound of voices, had recorded everything said in the White House, including the President's conversations with visiting foreign leaders.
In a last desperate attempt to free himself of investigation, Nixon dismissed the special prosecutor Cox in October 1973.
His Attorney-General (his third!) resigned in protest, and on 23 October the House of Representatives began to consider the impeachment of the President — he only constitutional way in which it could remove a President considered unfit for office.
Nixon now agreed to release some of the tapes; but others remained "missing" and on one a vital section had been erased "accidentally" .
On 31 May 1974, the Supreme Court decided by eight votes to nil that the President must hand over the tapes to the new Special Prosecutor, Leon Jaworski, and in July the House Judiciary Committee voted that the President should be impeached.
On 5 August 1974, the President admitted that he had known of the Watergate break-in in June 1972, and confessed to his part in the subsequent cover-up.
Three days later he became the first President in American history to resign his office.
Nixon escaped further legal action when his successor, Gerald Ford, granted him a pardon.
Haldeman, Ehrlichman, Dean and others served prison sentences for conspiracy and obstruction of justice.
Along with the central issue of the Watergate scandal — the cover-up — and the involvement of the President and the White House, a series of other revelations showed the Nixon administration in a most unsavoury light.
There were financial irregularities on the part of "CREEP" involved thousands of dollars — possible millions — from individuals or corporations who hoped to benefit by Nixon's election.
A "dirty tricks" department operated from within the White House, hatching schemes to smear possible Democratic opponents.
The President's obsession with security led him to authorize the wire-tapping of government employees, while Liddy and Hunt, part of the Watergate burglary team, illegally entered the offices of a psychiatrist who had treated Daniel Ellsberg, the man who leaked the Pentagon Papers to the press, in order to steal his medical records.
Vice-President Spiro Agnew, who had campaigned so hard for law and order, resigned in October 1973, after revelations of extensive tax evasion on his part.
President Nixon had to agree to pay over $400 000 in tax arrears in 1974, after the disclosure that he had failed to report capital gains on the sale of property.
The atmosphere of suspicion and intrigue that pervaded the White House, with the President increasingly remote from contact with everyday reality, was also captured by the famous tapes.
Their phrases were revealing.
Referring to the 1972 election, Nixon said: "This is war…
I want the most comprehensive list on all those who tried to do us in…they are asking for it and they are going to get it."
The language used by the  president was also a shock to many, and the transcripts of the tapes were punctuated with the phrase "expletive deleted" .
The illegal break-in at the Watergate Building was in retrospect quite unnecessary in terms of Nixon's electoral changes in 1972.
It had occurred because of an obsessive concern over the possibility that the President's bid for re-election might just possibly fail.
The men around Nixon who planned the escapade were not elected professional politicians, but mainly "west coast advertising types" concerned only to sell their "product" and not too worried over the means by which they achieved this end.
The train of events which they began exposed the American system of government to a challenge at once humiliating and formidable.
The vast increase in the power of the President since 1945 has led some to compare his position with that of a Roman Emperor.
In the hands of an unscrupulous man, there seemed no limit to his power.
The revelations of Watergate shook the confidence of many Americans in their entire political system, which almost ground to a halt in the 18 months before Nixon's resignation.
The one real consolation that could be salvaged from the whole sorry affair was that the system had worked in the end.
A free, honourable and vigorous press played a central role in exposing Nixon; the Supreme Court and the Senate stood firm and forced his downfall.
But some of the mystique surrounding the presidency had gone for ever, and future holders of the office were bound to be scrutinized more closely than ever before.
12 Ford, Carter and Reagan, 1974–83
(1) Ford and the 1976 Election
The circumstances in which Gerald Ford became President of the United States in August 1974 were unique in American history.
Nixon was the first President to resign in mid-term; Ford himself had not been elected but appointed in December 1973 to the office of Vice-President, to replace the disgraced Spiro Agnew.
He was the former Republican leader in the House of Representatives, and had been chosen as Vice-President for his reputation for honesty rather than for any outstanding political qualities.
Lyndon Johnson once remarked unkindly: "Jerry Ford is so dumb he can't walk and chew gum at the same time." 
His greatest strength since his appointment was that he had steered clear of the Watergate scandal.
When he took over from Nixon he wisely moved General Alexander Haig, Nixon's Chief of Staff in the White House during the final stages of the affair: Haig became Supreme Allied Commander of NATO.
Otherwise he made few changes in personnel.
It was his chief aim to restore the nation's faith in the presidency.
His grant of a "full, free and absolute pardon" to Nixon in September 1974 did, however, raise new doubts: had this been agreed earlier as a condition of Nixon's resignation?
Ford defended his action, pointing out that a protracted trial of the former President would serve only to continue the long agony of Watergate, and distract the United States and its people from more urgent matters.
Ford's short presidency went some way towards restoring the unity of the nation; it left no great mark otherwise, but he was sufficiently respected by 1976 to gain the Republican nomination against his main rival, Ronald Reagan.
The Democrats had no obvious candidate once Teddy Kennedy had decided that Chappaquiddick was too close to allow him to run in 1976.
Their choice was a surprising one: Jimmy Carter, a 51-year old peanut farmer and former Governor of Georgia.
At the start of the campaign for nomination, Carter had two great disadvantages: he was practically unknown outside Georgia, and he was from the deep South.
He overcame them by a highly organized campaign.
Once nominated, he chose a northern liberal, Senator Walter Mondale of Minnesota, as vice-presidential candidate to give a balanced ticket.
His own political standpoint remained obscure and he wisely campaigned on the broad issue of honest government.
He told Americans that they were "good, decent, honest and open" and that these were the qualities that he intended to take to Washington.
Being a little-known outsider was in fact an advantage in the post-Watergate period, and the result was a narrow victory for Cater, who polled 48.8 million votes to Ford's 39.1 million.
The support of 90% of blacks for Carter, even though he was a white Southerner, may well have been the crucial factor in his victory.
(2) The Carter Administration at Home and Abroad (1977–81)
Carter entered office on a wave of enthusiasm, yet with few signs of a clear policy.
His cabinet was conventional and "safe" ; but his White House staff were drawn mainly from Georgia — probably his first mistake.
The press delighted in attacking the "Georgia Mafiosi" for any indiscretion, and Carter's loyalty to them could be embarrassing in a man dedicated to high moral standards.
This was notably true of his delay in sacking his Budget Director, Bert Lance, accused of bad banking practices in his pre-White House career.
But Carter's main weakness lay in dealing with Congress.
As an outsider he commanded no "bloc" there, and the legislation to which the gave highest priority failed to get through.
The most notable example was his energy-saving plan, designed to combat the effects of the massive rise in world oil prices (CORE, p. 197).
By 1977, the USA was importing no less than 45% of her oil, at a cost of $3.8 billion a month.
Carter's plan included a 10% rise in the price of petrol and the development of alternative fuels like gas, coal and solar energy.
Most people acknowledged that something had to be done, but Congress continued to drag its heels.
This rise in the cost of oil had led to world-wide recession trade, and already during Ford's presidency (1974–7) unemployment and inflation had struck the American economy hard.
They continued under Carter, and his administration failed to produce any effective solutions.
Unemployment stayed about 7% (14% among blacks), and inflation went into double figures.
For all his sincerity, Jimmy Carter seemed unable to communicate any real sense of vigour or purpose to his domestic policies, which remained conservative and essentially piecemeal.
In foreign policy the Carter administration had a mixed record.
He continued the restraint over intervention in other countries"affairs that had marked US policy ever since Vietnam.
He also placed great emphasis on the world-wide encouragement of human rights.
This was a noble aspiration, but led to difficulties with the Soviet Union as well as with some of the military dictators of Latin America.
Such powers, with a bad record on human rights, were quick to show resentment at what they saw as American meddling in their internal affairs.
Nevertheless Carter had several undoubted successes in foreign policy.
He brought together President Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Begin of Israel in the Camp David Agreement of September 1978, to start a new move to peace in the Middle East (CORE, p. 146).
In 1978, he persuaded the Senate to accept a treaty agreeing to hand over control of the Panama Canal to the state of Panama by the year 2000.
Full diplomatic relations with China were established in 1978, and a SALT 2 treaty was completed with the Soviet Union in 1979 (though this was not ratified by the Senate).
But the last two years of the Carter administration were dominated by events in Iran and Afghanistan.
The main American ally in the vital oil area of the Persian Gulf, the pivot of anti-Soviet defence in the region, was the Shah of Iran upon whom Washington had lavished billions of dollars and huge quantities of the most up-to-date military equipment.
Early in 1979 the Shah was overthrown by a widespread national revolution.
He was replaced by a Muslim revolutionary regime dominated by a 79-year-old theologian, the Ayatollah Khomeini.
These events led directly to Carter's most testing challenge when in November 1979 a gang of young Muslim revolutionaries stormed the American embassy in Tehran and seized about 100 Americans.
They demanded that the Shah, who had fled from Iran and who was undergoing treatment for cancer in the USA, should be sent back for trial before the hostages were set free.
The Shah left the USA (he died in Egypt in July 1980), but the hostages were held in Iran.
The embassy became the scene of hysterical anti-American demonstrations by vast mobs, and fears for the hostages"safety rose at home.
President Carter displayed considerable restraint in the crisis until an attempt was made in April 1980 to rescue the hostages by force.
This mission failed when three troop-carrying helicopters crashed in a remote desert area of Iran, and the final release of the hostages did not take place until after the election of 1980.
Eventually, in January 1981, the remaining 52 hostages were freed when $7.9 billion worth of frozen Iranian assets were returned marking the end of a humiliating experience for the world's wealthiest and apparently most powerful nation.
During this long-drawn-out crisis there had occurred (in December 1979) a Russian invasion of Afghanistan, in support of the fragile Marxist government lately set up there.
Stopping short of direction intervention, Carter had taken a firm line.
He strengthened American forces in the Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf; stepped up military aid to Pakistan; imposed an embargo on wheat exports to the Soviet Union; and called for a boycott of the Moscow Olympic Games of 1980.
None of these measures induced a change of Soviet policy and Russian occupation of Afghanistan has continued.
(3) The Election of 1980 — President Reagan
In 1980 the Democrats re-nominated Jimmy Carter despite a renewed challenge from Teddy Kennedy.
Carter's Republican opponent this time was Ronald Reagan, a not very distinguished former Hollywood film star who had been Governor of California.
Although Reagan was a right-wing candidate, he was careful not to repeat the mistake of Goldwater in 1964 of allowing himself to appear an extremist.
Those who dismissed him as a third-rate actor failed to recognize his ability as a political campaigner.
Many observers also underestimated the strength of disillusionment with Carter's record: his administration appeared formless and accident-prone, and the President himself a man who know how to gain power but how to use it.
The campaign was dull despite the entry of a lively third-party candidate.
Reagan won comfortably, carrying 44 of the 50 states; but the turn-out was low, and in fact only just over one-quarter of those Americans qualified to vote actually voted for him.
But the Republicans also won a majority in the Senate and gained seats in the House.
Soon after taking office Reagan won much popular sympathy when he was shot and wounded in an assassination attempt.
His policies, domestic and foreign, proved firmly Republican and conservative.
At home he called for  "a new beginning" , involving tax cuts and a lowering of Federal spending, except on defence; less Federal interference in people's lives, less expenditure on the social services.
This policy appears to mark the reversal of an established tradition going back nearly fifty years to the New Deal, and to strike at the most vulnerable group in the United States — the poor (many of them black) and the old.
Moreover it inevitably ran into difficulties and criticism in the early 1980s when the American economy was in serious trouble — with a steep rise in oil prices and no agreement on how to conserve energy, and with inflation, unemployment and interest rates all running at a high level.
By mid-1983, more stable oil prices helped slow the rate of inflation, and employment prospects looked rather brighter.
Yet a soaring budget deficit, fuelled by vast spending on defence, remained a sign of the fragility of any recovery as election year (1984) approached.
Abroad, Reagan took a tough line in bargaining with the Russians over nuclear weapons and warned the Soviet Union against interference in Poland (CORE, pp. 95–6).
Disarmament negotiations opened in 1983 in Geneva, and the Reagan Administration called for the withdrawal from Eastern Europe of the new range of Soviet SS20 missiles — the so-called "zero option" .
In return, the USA and her West European allies offered to halt the deployment of Cruise and Pershing missiles, which were to be supplied to the NATO powers later in 1983.
Nearer home Reagan displayed in Central America readiness to back established and sometimes reactionary governments against left-wing guerrilla movements, as in El Salvador, or opposition to left-wing governments, as in Nicaragua.
The presence of a growing number of US military "advisers" and of US warships in the area led critics of the government to fear "another Vietnam" .
Moreover, by November 1983 American soldiers had gone into action in the Middle East, as the major element in a United Nations force attempting to open a way to peace in the Lebanon, long battered by civil war; and in the tiny Caribbean island of Grenada, where, following a coup within the island's Marxist-dominated government, the Reagan Administration — fearful of Cuban activities — had sent in the Marines, an action condemned by the United Nations.