

Liz Heron
Dear Green Place
I was born in May 1947, when the whole of Britain was thawing out of a long, freezing winter made crueller by a fuel crisis.
A year too early to benefit from the National Health Service at this stage in my life, I arrived in a maternity home in Govan with the assistance of nursing sisters.
Nuns, in a variety of roles, would populate odd corners of my later childhood.
My mother was thirty-eight, my father thirty-four.
Both were born and grew up in the East End of Glasgow.
Both left school at fourteen: my father to work as a butcher's messenger boy, my mother to learn machining in a shirt factory.
She worked as a machinist until she married my father in 1946 and chose never to have a job again.
They moved out of the city, to Lanarkshire, on its edges.
 "You were a good baby," my mother would tell me, "good as gold." 
She meant I didn't girn or make a fuss, and meant I should have stayed that way.
In photographs I'm already scowling by the time I'm two: in an Argyle Street photographer's studio, clutching a rubber doll, dressed in a tailored coat with a velvet collar and an enormous bow in my hair; or paddling with my parents in the sea, somewhere off the coast of Ireland.
Ireland was everywhere around us, a protective blanket of second-hand memories and martyred history and bitter victimology.
For it was Protestants who got better jobs, who skipped the queue for houses, who made my father work on Christmas day when the union voted against the optional holiday — to keep the Papes in their place.
 "God Save Ireland" my mother would exclaim if there was news of world catastrophe on the wireless or the milk threatened to boil over.
Ireland was already there with its litany of laments, not thinly preserved, like the cultural echo that accompanies some exiles and  émigrés into a new country where time will absorb the native generation's traces of foreign identity and dispel them.
It was late in the day and we were still waiting our turn; still wandering in search of the Promised Land.
All Saints was my first primary school.
It was in Coatdyke, half-way between Coatbridge (Catholic) and Airdrie (Protestant).
School and home were on opposite sides of the steep hill that was the main road joining the two.
Trams went up and down it.
We lived in the tenement block that ran its whole length in a top-storey room and kitchen with no bathroom and an outside toilet shared with several other families and reached by an open staircase.
At night I slept in the big kitchen on the brown leatherette bed settee, and my parents slept in the box room.
This is a time of austerity, of playing with ration books, of knowing we are "overcrowded" , of squabbles between the women over doing the stairs and cleaning the toilet that are handed down to us children in the form of sectarian rivalries.
 "I'd rather see you dead than turn your coat like her next door." 
 "A mother's place is at home with her child" damns the mothers who aren't and answers my question about why I can't go to the nursery.
But out on the wide, untidy expanse behind the drying green and the wash houses the children must have forgotten, for we play tig and hide-and-seek in the long grass, running about in gangs of indiscriminate age and religion.
And the girls have doll and pram races.
As an only child I was rare among my schoolmates; most Catholic  families were more numerous, big brothers and wee sisters gave other children the advantage of additional, if vicarious, experience.
My mother made novenas, but the longed-for infant who would share the burden of childhood with me never arrived.
I am bowled over by my first day at school; there are scores of us sitting at long bench desks in a vast wooden hut.
We play with plasticine, draw pictures and start learning to count; a white-haired lady with a navy blue costume and a bun presides.
At three o'clock when I am collected to go home I can hardly wait to go back once I've had my tea.
The next three years at this school are the source of few and faint memories, but school relieved the loneliness of only-childhood.
If the benefits of large families were obvious in the Irish peasant society in which we had once had our roots, they had a certain value for us too; they scored vital points on the council housing list.
In the early fifties Scotland's housing shortage was still severe.
Larger families around us were being rehoused at a steady rate, but  we were doomed to wait for ever.
In 1954 savings were sunk in buying a "room and kitchen with scullery" ; it had no bathroom, but there was an inside toilet, and it was a better area.
We moved to Uddingston.
The tenement building we moved from is now gone (as is the one we moved to), replaced by a row of council blocks of impressive ugliness, vintage early sixties.
I know those tenement-lined streets invite a nostalgic lament for the loss of community.
But the nostalgia invokes the mythic existence of an interdependent and mutually supportive working class that was then broken up and scattered geographically forfeiting its cohesion and everyday solidarity for the false promises amenities an material improvements trading off its hopes of new of a truly better world for a bigger share in the spoils of the old one and the new fruits of the consumer society.
This nostalgia for the Edenic community of poverty is not the nostalgia of working-class people but of others.
Implicit in it is a belief in the nobility of the suffering victim and a judgement that sees the working class as inevitably corrupted by material things.
But to rely on the decline of pre-war forms of working-class life and the rise in consumerism as a political explanation for what has happened to working-class loyalties is the narrowest kind of mythic reconstruction.
It appropriates the imagination of others.
For most people whose political and economic power is limited, history is something that is made every day, every week, in a way of living that might either accommodate to future possibilities or wrestle with them.
For young people there is still room to invent them.
That was particularly true for the generation I grew up in.
Some people can go on inventing, of course, but with a different set of conditions attached to their lives.
Beyond 1945 and its immediate aftermath was the outline of a future permeated with hope.
I find it hard to imagine what the end of the war must have meant.
I look at a photograph of my father still in uniform, taken at Loch Lomond before he was demobbed, as he stands smiling between his younger brother and the English friend he had met in an Italian POW camp.
In East Prussia only months before he had crossed fields strewn with corpses to reach the  American lines after the Russian advance had enveloped his prison camp.
The details of his three years' captivity from the North African desert to the Eastern Front were not spoken of for more than another thirty, other than by occasional scant reference.
Once demobbed he planned to go to New Zealand and start a new life.
Back in Glasgow he found his father seriously ill.
The new life turned into marriage, my birth and an attempt to start a business with some of his demob money; he and his brother rented shop premises to sell painting and decorating materials.
Neither had "a head for figures" the venture failed within months and my father found a job as a tradesman again.
For years throughout my childhood he exchanged Christmas letters with another ex-POW in New Zealand.
He had a daughter my age called Zoe and he sent me illustrated books of Australian flowers and bird-life.
Alcoholism is recognised as a major social problem in the west of Scotland.
I don't know the figures for mental illness, but they must be of the same order, though better hidden.
It can go on for years before families are forced to acknowledge the truth…
On a taxi ride across the Clyde Valley — Hamilton, Motherwell, Wishaw going with my father to the psychiatric hospital where my mother had just been admitted, I was overwhelmed by the past, not just the place names that had filled my childhood when I'd lived in this part of Scotland over twenty years before, but another past to which I had even less access: a prelude to my own.
I have few clues that would let me construct a picture of my mother's childhood, that would explain her denial of mine as my own, and the rage that came with that denial.
I only know there was a father who was both idolised and undoubtedly feared, a dogmatic and overbearing Catholic.
He also had in him the wrathful patriarch of the Protestant religion, for he was the product of the two warring faiths, of an Irish Catholic mother and an Irish Presbyterian father, and of the Sunday ritual my mother would repeatedly describe as if narrating the auspicious early life of a saint.
It was mother who sent the children to Mass, father who beat the daylights out of them when they got home; in the end mother won, father lost and, Protestant-educated, they grew up Catholics.
This grandfather of mine died in 1932, but his wife lived until I was sixteen.
But long before her death my grandmother was a ghost to me, as if she was never really there, even though I visited her regularly as a child.
She was a quiet, gentle soul, she had no malice in her, but I doubt whether she had the smallest capacity for taking care of other people.
Maybe she had tried, but in her sixties she had slumped into forgetfulness.
She lived alone in a block of old people's flats in the East End of Glasgow; around her, layers of dust coated the jumble of furniture and holy pictures and pious bric-a-brac, and the kitchen was filmed with grease.
At four I stay with her when my mother spends a week in hospital for a minor operation.
I want her to talk to me, to tell me stories about her as a little girl, to play with me and look as I play, but she drifts off into herself.
The flats face Carntyne dog track, and I gaze out of the window at the greyhounds as they sprint after the electric hare, then, late in the afternoon, transfer my attention to the road, in the hope of seeing my father appear again with sweeties, and notebooks for me to draw in.
That week was an eternity of solitude and boredom.
Most Saturdays, too, had that time-stopped flavour, for then my mother would take me with her on her weekly visits.
The only memories are of the long walk down from Parkhead Cross where we get off the bus we've taken along the Gallowgate from the centre of town.
All the way past Parkhead Forge I drag my feet.
I hate the heavy dirtiness of the area, the grit and dust in my eyes and mouth, the litter blowing along in the gutter of the deserted road before we turn under the railway bridge and into Todd Street.
At my Granny's we hear the Parkhead roar all afternoon if Celtic is playing at home, and we take the train home from Carntyne station where a nauseatingly bad smell fills the air.
 "What is it?" 
I remember asking.
 "A piggery." 
 "What's a piggery?" 
 "Where they melt down pig's fat." 
These were intimations of years to come when I, too, would be a sourly dutiful daughter.
And years of Mass and Devotions, the Sacred Heart Messenger and a thousand shoddy pieties, of no  make-up, of becoming "a fine Catholic teacher" , of enacting someone else's life as it might have been, as it would have been "with my advantages" .
When I read Mary Gordon's Final Payments a few years ago I shuddered with relief at having broken the spell of what had been wished on me.
And then there is my other grandmother, Sarah, my father's mother.
I was not given her name — that came from my mother and her mother — but I think I must have inherited her resilience, which my father has too.
As a child I was kept at a distance from her, because of rifts in the family.
I only got to know her a little as a teenager when I visited her on my own in the single-end where she lived in a Parkhead tenement, sleeping, washing and cooking in one room.
Everything was scrubbed clean, as she was herself.
At eighty she sparkled with cheerfulness and good humour.
She was well under five feet in height and her legs were terribly bowed because of rickets.
She had had eight children, only four of whom survived, and had done hard physical work all her life because my grandfather had poor health.
She was born in the reign of Queen Victoria, suffered malnutrition as a child and had brought up her own children in poverty.
She died at eighty-four in an old people's home after having a stroke.
I wish I had known her better.
This grandmother can be a heroine for me now, although it would have meant more to have been closer to her in life.
I can only admire her courage.
I can also acknowledge that there must have been many women like her, all over Glasgow; that there were then in the early 1900s when she was marrying and becoming a mother; that there were later.
Many women whose courage has to be admired.
Working-class women who endured hardship and self-sacrifice and survived with something of themselves still intact.
But there were also women whose courage failed them.
Women who did not have the heart or the will to live up to what the moral and social order said they should be, but who lived by it nonetheless.
Perhaps they could not be good wives and good mothers because they could not give what they had never had.
The houses are Glasgow, not the people — these (Their character all shaded to suit their environment.
Life doesn't take there).
Are simply the food the houses live and grow on Endlessly, drawing from them their vulgarity And pettiness and darkness of spirit wrote Hugh MacDiarmid in "Glasgow" the same year I was born.
For me as a child, Glasgow was its buildings; the city was physically oppressive in a way that is painfully memorable.
How now to understand my passion for Glasgow that has grown over the years of absence from Scotland?
My heart lurches when the train from Euston crosses the Clyde.
Maybe it's the knowledge that my history isn't entirely mine alone.
And now I'm seduced by the city's romance and generosity, its vitality and resilience.
This is the "dear green place" that its name may once have meant to the Celts.
My feelings about my childhood shift around all the time.
My mother the past, my father the future.
The line back to childhood memories is elastic.
At seven it tightens and I feel a tug.
It's just before my seventh birthday that we move.
There's the excitement of birthday cards in a new house, and a new school where my classroom is again a hut with a wood stove.
At home there were often rows about spending money.
But the year I was seven something gave.
The world spread out for me in a new map of associations and sensations.
We went to Paris to see one of my father's sisters.
Both were nuns in the same religious order, one in the north of England, the other in France where she had been interned throughout the Occupation.
This was my father's first visit to her since the war; what made it possible was the free travel concession he now had, working for British Railways as a painter and decorator.
In 1954 it was a long journey by rail from Glasgow to Paris, and it must have seemed longer to me.
I remember the stale leathery smell of the trains, and sleeping curled up in station waiting rooms in the middle of the night.
At the end of it is a Paris suburb, a bed with cool white linen and nuns fussing around me.
A tall tree spreads its branches outside my bedroom window and everything is different from what I've known: to my ears, my nostrils and my taste buds.
New toys are found for me and I play in the courtyard of the  high-walled convent or slide on the waxed floors, too shy to talk to anyone.
I am spell-bound by the sound of French, infuriated when I can't read it in the books I am given.
We are honoured guests; every meal is a feast, with spectacular displays of food on polished serving dishes: golden roasts and garnished vegetables, salads, new kinds of fruit and creamy custards, cutlery gleaming and glasses sparkling against the white napkins with their silvery rings, rings of crusty bread piled in a basket.
Nothing is like at home.
Here is a sweet-smelling haven of order and nourishment, peace and security.
I decide to become a nun.
This aspiration reflected a craving for everyday structure that persisted over years.
With a desperate envy I read adventure stories where childhood freedoms were supported by a hidden foundation of adult labour and organisation.
These middle-class heroes and heroines returned from their exploits in the great outdoors of the Cotswolds or the Cornish Moors to the sound of the gong that summoned them to groaning tables.
Hampers were laid on for picnics, parcels of treats supplied for midnight romps in Swiss Alpine dorms, and no child's insatiable hunger went unsatisfied.
Only the orphan until the final chapter, when even she would sit by a warm fire, rescued at last from a cruel world and adult depredations by the long-lost loving parent who waits at the end of every unhappy child's rainbow.
That common dream of children's literature, of independence from the power of adults, and a safe, warm place of their making, filled my fantasies.
Often they were shared.
At eight or nine I planned to run away with my friend Ann, to escape from the unjust punishments, the complaints of ingratitude, the wrongs I unwittingly committed.
In our games we borrowed lives from the books we read or from the hardy and hard-done-by heroines of Bunty, Girls' Crystal or School Friend.
We shared their dreams of escape and vindication.
There were other sources for our fantasies.
On Sunday nights at home we listen to Dan Dare on Radio Luxemburg and that week's episode is replayed and embellished, with Ann and her brother, who also read it in the Eagle.
Television at home came later; for now we watch it in the Italian cafe, where the price of a penny ice lolly  opens the dusty chenille curtain and we can join the other children huddled in the darkness in front of the flickering screen in the corner.
We sit on wooden boxes round the heavy tables with their curling iron legs, and because the lollies are set on sticks splintered from firewood you sometimes get a skelf in your mouth as you suck, intent on the Lone Ranger.
Our admission charge rations us to one programme.
For a while television was a rare and special thing; not many people had it and they were well off.
Then not having it rapidly became a sign of poverty.
We got ours in 1956, and the filmed reports of the Hungarian uprising and of its refugees arriving in Britain gave me my first image of dramatic world events.
This was of a different order from my imaginings about the Chinese communists, arch villains whose evil doings were retailed to us in the classroom with the same ferocious didacticism that accompanies the telling of a lurid fairy tale and enhances its horrifying fascination.
The imaginary and timeless cruelties of the Chinese are relished as they frighten us, while the drama of the Hungarians is a disturbing intrusion of someone else's reality that, glimpsed on the television screen, is not entirely unlike our own: worried-looking men in square-shouldered, belted coats; forlorn children.
Television came in the wake of other consumer durables: a vacuum cleaner and a boiler for the washing — once used to cook a lobster my father has brought back from the Highlands where he's been on a spell of painting stations that will be closed by the Beeching plan a decade later.
I remember squealing as we watch the black monster twitch its claws on the scullery floor.
In school this progressive acquisition of domestic technology was taken for granted, and we felt sorry for those children who lagged behind.
These were the children some of the teachers looked down on because they came to school with unmended holes in their jumpers, or no proper shoes, only canvas sandshoes to see them through the winter.
They were clearly destined for the junior secondary, with no hope of passing the "qualie" .
Most of us, children of tradesmen, miners and semi-skilled factory workers, were better off than that and had higher hopes, though there was a good scattering of nits and lice and dirty feet around the classroom when  the nurse came to do her inspection.
We'd been filled with school milk and cod-liver oil and orange juice, but only the few scheme-housing children had bathrooms.
In the 1950s the West of Scotland had no Catholic middle class to speak of There was the odd professional, the occasional doctor or lawyer, but our closest link with another class, with an individual of social standing, was in the classroom.
At primary school my teachers occupied the pedestal that should have been reserved for "Our Lady" whom the catechism prescribed as the model of Catholic girlhood and womanhood.
Our Ladylike behaviour was the touchstone for pious adult injunctions: "Our Lady wouldn't whistle; Our Lady wouldn't go to Mass without gloves; Our Lady wouldn't show her knickers like that, be so selfish, so lazy, so cheeky." 
A more benign and glamorous model was embodied in the young women teachers with their New Look skirts and wide-belted dresses.
They were all in a state of becoming engaged or about to be married; nearly all virginal, but on the verge of something else.
By the time we reach primary seven, and I am ten, my class has become preoccupied with sex.
We are mesmerised by the mystery of young women's bodies, trying to unlock their secrets with words that are whispered from desk to desk.
 "What's pregnant?" 
 "What's prostitute?" 
I looked them up in the big dictionary my father had bought for me by mail order at the beginning of the year.
The same year I got a Pears Cyclopaedia from him at Christmas.
In it I read and re-read the Greek myths and legends, consumed with a desire to understand the sexual exploits of the gods, capricious beings, sometimes part or wholly animal.
Some of them I had already encountered in Tanglewood Tales I and II, which I'd read in the class library at a younger and less sexually conscious age, but the power of those stories also lay in what was only half-knowable.
The other kind of sex I learned about was the meaning of the four-letter words the boys chalked up on the playground wall, though the explanations were inadequate and puzzling, passed on by other children and received with incredulity.
This kind of sex — "how Teddy Boys said goodnight to their girlfriends" — was shocking and dirty, but couldn't be all there was to it.
To love and  romance and how babies were made.
The mysteries remained.
Books were the key to making sense of the world around me, as well as the means of transcending its realities, and my reading was obsessive.
I read my way through the children's section of Uddingston library: Rosemary Sutcliffe and G.A.
Henty, travel books and career books, school stories and Enid Blyton's Famous Five and Secret Seven and "Adventure" books.
For Christmas and birthdays I asked for the red, hard-backed children's classics published by Dean and Co. and sold in Woolworth's: Treasure Island, The Children of the New Forest, Alice in Wonderland, What Katy Did, A Tale of Two Cities.
And there were the prizes I'd accumulated through primary, books for Good Attendance or General Merit, in which I usually came top girl.
I read everything I could find about France (since France was my dream country, where I felt I'd been meant to be born and grow up…) and developed a particular passion for the French Revolution, reading all the Scarlet Pimpernel books, the story of the first Madame Tussaud, forced to model the guillotined heads, and everything that I could find that would bring it all to life.
I think I had the average child's thirst for blood and a more than average thirst for romance.
I filled a notebook with names and stories about the Revolution and planned to write a book in which all my favourites would appear.
The only other fictional world I lived in with the same intensity was that of Louisa M. Alcott.
I was not alone in the way I identified with the saga of the March family, nor was I alone in identifying with Jo (and presumably all readers do) in her hurts and disappointments, her longings for femininity that clashed with her dreams of independence and achievement; and in wishing for the ultimate fairness of all things as they were shaped by those nineteenth century moral certainties.
All mothers were good mothers, all wives were good wives.
That was how I wanted it to be, but what made me ache was the knowledge that Jo couldn't have all she wanted: to he the writer of stories, whose stories were her children, but heart-breakingly not to have Laurie.
I yearned for Laurie and raged at the injustice of Jo's making do with the elderly Professor Behr, unconvinced by the book's insistence that she was happy.
Books were solitary, but the stories and people in them were sometimes shared.
So too were the made-up stories.
With my friend  Ann, I go for walks across the hilly fields towards Viewpark or go playing on the coal byngs, and we make up stories, often vengeful episodes in which punishments are meted out to our enemies.
Foremost among them are the Queen and the class bully.
The Queen because she is rich and English, and the English are all our enemies because of Bruce and Bannockburn, and Bonnie Prince Charlie and Mary Queen of Scots.
We sometimes write down the stories and one summer with other children we put on a play we had adapted from a Russian folktale in Folktales of Many Lands.
But we forget our lines when we see the audience, a rival group of girls to whom the only boy in our gang has defected.
They jeer at our efforts and laugh at our makeshift costumes.
But revenge is not to be allowed us, for when we turn up at their concert a phalanx of adults is there to make sure the audience behaves.
Ann's dad was a bookie.
Her house had a bathroom, and a rose garden, and a grand piano in the front room.
And at the back of the house were the wooden sheds that were our palaces, our temples, our ranches, our mansions.
With her brother and others we pick brambles and wild strawberries along the disused railway line and gather gooseberries in the overgrown field next to the cafe.
There are walks to Bothwell Castle where we picnic with tomato sandwiches and lemonade in the unkempt, wooded grounds or inside the ruins, always in a group of girls.
These are my childhood idylls, when summer holidays were always hot and sunny.
In the rough and tumble of my street there was less luxuriance.
I had a sense of belonging, but I felt awkward with my body.
Children of all ages played together, at kick-the-can and peever, hide-and-seek and steps and tig.
I could never run fast enough and day-dreamed too much.
The same went for all the climbing and jumping across the back court, over high walls and coal bunkers, that we did in the girls' gang.
I could never keep up.
I was small and thin for my age, had colds all winter long and was considered "frail" .
But we all went swimming on Tuesday nights at Hamilton baths, and I did better than some because my father had taught me to swim on holiday.
Everything changed in the late summer of 1958 when I went to "the convent" , Elmwood, my senior secondary school, and began to lose sight of all these children, now separated by age or by the hurdle of the "qualie" that had kept some back and relegated them to the junior secondary where school ended at fifteen, divided girls from boys and clever from less clever.
In my A stream class at "the convent" I knew none of the other girls and rarely saw my former classmates.
In primary school the qualifying exam had been talked of for at least two years before the time came, yet I have no memory of when it did, only that our last term was punctuated with little exams and on two occasions we had something quite new to do: intelligence tests.
One day we sit up straight at our desks to be told who has passed and who has failed.
 "Sorry, Jimmy," the teacher clucks sympathetically at one unfortunate.
 "You tried hard but you didn't make it." 
The unfairness of this strikes me, since although we are all from families that vote Labour (no working-class Catholic would vote Unionist) Jimmy had been the only one in the class who'd known that Hugh Gaitskell was the leader of the Opposition in the general knowledge quiz.
I hadn't.
But despite this gap in my knowledge, at the final prizegiving I pocketed the medal for Dux Girl, gold-plated and engraved and donated — two to each local school, regardless of religious denomination — by Mr Archie Tunnock of Tunnock's Caramel Wafers (Uddingston's only factory).
My name was the first to go on the Dux board in the school hall of the brand-new, glass-walled building only just completed the year before.
The short brown gym tunic with its blue and gold woven girdle that I wore on my first day at Elmwood was a symbol of entry into a new world of lady-like refinement and academic elitism.
At any rate it had been so in the past when Elmwood had been a private school.
The still-rarefied atmosphere received a heavy blast of different air as the school opened its gates to the bulging generation of girls born just after the war and a working class bound for higher educational achievements than it had ever had within its reach.
My year was born in 1946 — I was younger than most of my new classmates.
Without the nuns the tone of the school would have been lower, but they maintained a discreet background presence and our spiritual  as well as our academic guidance was delegated to a staff that were largely "lay" .
The women, the majority, were unmarried; the men, married.
The men took more liberties and joked with us.
The women's style was severe and more remote, protected by their teachers' armour — as if there was nothing more to their lives that could connect them with ours.
Discipline was rigid and we respected it, but resented it too, because of a particular juvenile arrogance that must have been founded on the knowledge that the world was changing a lot more than they realised, and it was for us that it was changing.
There were hints that they too saw signs in our future; in second year our history teacher told us that things were easier now for Catholics than they had ever been, that we could have a place in the world, that there was even a chance that a Catholic would be President of the United States after the next election.
But the friendships, rivalries and enmities that were the daily humours of this densely female world were often  underlain by class differences, snobberies about who had what and who lived where — between the daughters of the traditional convent-school middle class and the rest of us.
Yet with its residual gentility, its variegated forest of a garden where we had practical botany lessons, and the original Victorian mansion building with its labyrinth of  poky rooms and winding staircases, it must have seemed that the convent was an accidental inheritance, never really meant for us, and thereby reminding us that we had come into our own; we had by right something more than had once been intended for us.
Sprawling around the main house were the new wooden huts built to accommodate an increasing school population and almost encroaching on the distant row of classrooms that housed the still-private primary school.
The whole school was closed down a few years ago.
I went back to see it, first in a state of dereliction, then half-demolished to make way for a private housing-state development.
I was a pupil at Elmwood for almost three years, until we moved house to Ayrshire in 1961.
I continued to do well, but there was an increasing gap between my home life and my aspirations, as these became more like possibilities.
It wasn't that these were definite; I  just wanted life to be different, to be somewhere else.
 "With education, the world is your oyster," my father told me.
But my mother's image of my future had to be challenged: I was not to marry; I would be her companion at all times in a perfect mother and daughter symbiosis; with my teacher's salary I would buy her a fridge and a washing machine and take care of her.
This she had made me promise when I was nine and she continued to insist that my refusal to live my life her way was selfishness and rank ingratitude.
I was ignoring the debt I owed her.
The debt was written off in a long, slow reckoning of my own, though by the time I reached my mid-teens I already had a certainty of the future waiting — a void to be filled as I chose, with nothing predetermined.
In a way that's the necessary, valuable mistake of youth at all times in history.
Yet women, of my generation were the first to have the chance to refuse burdens that just couldn't be borne, to understand that it was possible to refuse them without censure, to realise that if you still couldn't have everything, you could at least make some choices about what you could have.
I believed for many years that I could move towards the future and leave the past behind, that there was no need for me to return home.
But the past too has to be claimed.
I WENT to Glasgow University from 1964 to 1967.
In no sense did it correspond to the experience of student activism that so many of my generation were to go through elsewhere over the next few years.
I left just a bit less naive than when I'd started, and a lot more confused; in the end I fitted neither with the industrious working-class student body (which was a large proportion) nor with the socially confident middle class who did less work but had better cultural camouflage to disguise their deficiencies.
But the objective worth of my degree was far surpassed by its value as a stepping-stone to other places, other identities.
I didn't know about existentialism until I went to university, although at sixteen I had spent a lot of time agonising over  whether God existed and what was Free Will, and had the frisson of reading Voltaire.
In French literature lectures, Sartre became more than an academic discovery, though I understand only now why the idea that "the person is nothing else but his freedom" and the revelations of Nausea had such enormous appeal for me.
But I took on the idea of transcendence only at a personal level.
Even though the politics were there to see, for me they had no context yet.
There was the same gap between understanding and the possibility of action when I read Simone de Beauvoir's The Second Sex just before leaving university.
I felt a lot of anger, but there was nothing I could do with it; then it faded, until I started making some connections with feminism at the beginning of the seventies.
I left Scotland at the end of 1968.
There followed several years of working and travelling in Spain, France and Italy, punctuated by breaks of living and working in London.
I've lived in London continuously since 1975.
By that time I had some history of being involved in socialist politics, which helped make sense of the external world, and a dawning recognition that there was also an inner world to be explored and that the psyche couldn't just be dealt with by an effort of will.
There's the same difficulty with achieving liberation on a collective scale.
But while there's imagination, there's hope.