

INTRODUCTION
The French manufactured Dassault-Breguet Mystère 20, or Falcon 20 as it is known in the United States, is one of the most versatile executive jets flying in the world today.
No other business jet has so many differing roles: in addition to corporate use, it is used for military liaison and communication flights, casualty evacuation, photographic survey, aeronautical and meteorological research, navaid calibration, airline crew training, Electronic Counter Measure (ECM mission, weapon system trainer (Mirage 111E), mini freight carrier and in the near future the Garrett turbofan-engine 20G will be operated by the United States Coast Guard.
It is this great variety of tasks that has made research into the production history of each individual aircraft so interesting, and the principal reason why the Mystère/Falcon 20 was chosen for this monograph.
Although production will continue for many years yet, I feel it is time to record what historical production data is available before records are lost and memories fade.
As well as the usual features associated with a production history, I have where possible, added additional interesting facts such as the registration derivation, company data, record breaking flights and accident reports.
Whilst information is as complete as possible there will undoubtedly be additional interesting facts that need recording, and anyone having such knowledge is invited to write to me.
Brian Gates December 1977 11 Oaklands Drive Wokingham Berkshire RG11 2SA England 
Test Registrations
All Falcon 20 aircraft are allocated an F-W…registration (U.K. equivalent Class B), and are used for test or experimental flights, C of A qualification or renewal, and the approval of modifications.
Production Numbers
As well as a constructor's number, Falcon 20 aircraft delivered outside of North America were allotted a production number in the range 401–540.
The constructor's number (USA equivalent serial number) plate is located just inside the main entrance door at the bottom right, and the production number can be found on the tailplane, i.e. I-REAL is inscribed "Fan Jet Falcon No 491" .
However, for ease of administration the production number is no longer used, and commencing with 358 the constructor's number can also be found on the tailplane, i.e. SU-AZJ is inscribed "Fan Jet Falcon No 358" .
Dates
The following references have been used in determining the dates in the main text.
For Swiss, West German, Iranian, Canadian and British registered aircraft, the data was obtained from official sources.
For French, French speaking territories and Italian registration, the "date de delivrance" obtained from the International Civil Register of Aircraft, Bureau Veritas, has been used.
Most other delivery dates (Dd) are taken from Avions Marcel Dassault and Falcon Jet Corporation documents.
These dates generally refer to when the customer signed for the transfer of ownership.
Where possible, for USA deliveries, the transit date via Shannon has been quoted as the delivery date.
For transfer of ownership within the United States, the bill of sale date is quoted as per FAA documents.
It should be noted that following transfer of ownership, the registration of the aircraft often does not take place for some time afterwards.
This information is seldom recorded.
First flight (Ff) dates are taken from Avions Marcel Dassault documents and are included in the individual aircraft histories.
History & Development
It was in Dec 61 that Marcel Dassault gave the approval for the go ahead for the manufacture of the Mystère 20.
By Jan 62 the tooling jigs were assembled, and in Feb 62 the first metal was cut at the Bordeaux-Merignac factory on a sleek eight or ten seat twin-engine executive jet and military liaison aircraft, which had the aerodynamic features of the Mystère IV.
The engineering and design was carried out under the leadership of technical manager Paul de Plante and head of prototype engineering Paul Chassagne.
The production for the prototype was shared by Dassault and Sud Aviation.
Sud completed the fuselage, tail assembly and nacelles at St. Nazaire, and Dassault (now Breguet-Dassault following a merger in 1971) manufactured the wings exclusive of flaps and aileron, which are built by Reims Aviation.
Sud (now Aerospatiale) was at the time a partner with Dassault and this is why the type certificate for the aircraft states "Dassault-Sud" .
The prototype, F-WLKB, flew for the first time on 4 May 63 with Pratt and Whitney JT-12A-8 engines of 3,000 lbs thrust.
Witnessing this even was a Pan American team which included Senior Vice-President Franklin Gledhill, J.G. Borger and Lindberg.
The contract with Pan American was negotiated on the basis that the aircraft had General Electric CF-700 engines and some dimensional increases.
Production aircraft were standardised using CF-700s, and the re-engined prototype first flew under its new power on 10 Jul 64.
Following negotiations with Dassault, and after the announcement of the contract, the Business Jet Sales Division of Pan American was formed to distribute the Mystère 20 in the Western Hemisphere.
In July 63, the first of many substantial orders was placed by Pan Am, in this case for forty units with options on a further 120.
On 1 Jan 65 the first production aircraft, F-WMSH, flew incorporating small design refinements over the prototype.
The wing span was increased by 3ft 3 and a half in., the cabin lengthened by 1ft 6in., twin wheeled undercarriage units were installed on all members, and many other improvements initiated.
In addition the overall design of the system was constantly being reviewed.
9 Jun 65 saw both French and United States certification, and in the same month the new aircraft went on to establish two world records.
On the 10th, Mme Jacqueline Auriol took the Class C-1g speed record over a 1,000 km closed circuit to 534 mph, and on the 15th also broke the 2,000 km record at 509 mph.
By this time the first Pan American Mystère 20 had been delivered to the PAC facility at Burbank for outfitting.
Demonstration flights using this aircraft began in Aug 65.
Early in 1966 the name "Fan Jet Falcon" was adopted for American deliveries.
This later evolved to "Falcon 20" , and Dassault have since applied the name to every version, although the "Mystère 20" appellation still remains.
Order now began to multiply.
On 23 Jun 66 the Royal Canadian Air Force (now Canadian Armed Forces) ordered seven aircraft.
On 4 Jul 66 the Royal Australian Air Force ordered three aircraft, and most important of all on 28 Feb 67 the Business Jets Division of Pan Am increased their firm orders to 160.
Just prior to this, Air France commenced crew training operations using leased Falcons.
Practically all European and non-U.S.A.
Falcons were fitted out at the Bordeaux plant to customer specification.
In order to meet the demand for a maintenance and support facility, Europe Falcon Service, an AMD subsidiary, was formed on 25 May 67.
Today, EFSS has an air carrier's license and is operating Falcons on charter.
The commercial side of the operation is handled by Uni-Jet.
At the specific request from an Australian customer, the only low pressure tyre CC version for operation from unprepared landing strips was manufactured, and made its first flight in April 67.
In July of the same year the 100th production Falcon was delivered to Pan Am. 1968 saw the introduction into service of the Series D with increased fuel capacity, and the design of the short-field operation and generally refined Series E and F initiated.
The Falcon 20 was now well established enabling Dassault to concentrate on a smaller four to seven passenger executive transport, namely the "Falcon 10" .
This first flew with General Electric CJ610 turbojets on 1 Dec 70, which was an interim solution whilst awaiting the certification of the 731-2 engines.
Today with over one hundred units delivered world-wide (now powered by Garrett AiResearch 732-1 engines) it is well on the way to emulating the success of the Falcon 20.
Meanwhile, the Falcon 20 continued to enjoy a considerable success.
The prototype Series F first flew in May 69 and was certified on 20 Jan 70, becoming the first executive jet to meet the U.S. FAR Part 36 stringent anti-noise regulations.
During 1971 Dassault announced the Falcon 20T feederliner project  designed to take twenty-nine passengers in high density commuter seating.
This was later improved with an entirely new large diameter fuselage, and a capacity for thirty seats under U.S. FAR Part 298 regulations.
It was designated the "Falcon 30" and powered by two Lycoming ALF 502D turbo-fan engines made its first flight on 11 May 73.
For countries not governed by the USA regulations, the same airframe was to be known as the "Falcon 40" .
Despite extensive flight testing and development, the project was considered to be uneconomical and was shelved in 1975.
As well as executive use the Falcon 20 was by now used in a wide variety of differing roles.
A new employ for the aircraft was that of a "minifreighter" .
Under contract from the Business Jets Division of Pan Am, Little Rock Airmotive in Arkansas converted a Standard Falcon into a specialised cargo aircraft, the prototype flying for the first time on 28 Mar 72.
Basic feature of the conversion is the replacement of the standard cabin door by hydraulically operated on 6ft 2in wide by 5ft high, forward of the wind on the port side.
Federal Express Corp. of Memphis, Tn. now operate thirty-two of these "minifreighters" .
The idea of a long-range eight to ten passenger variant utilising TFE-731-3 powerplants, a redesigned fuselage and computer designed 3D wing to provide exceptional shortfield performance without sacrificing range and high cruise capability, was no uppermost in Dassault's future programme.
It reached fruition on 4 Sep 6, when the "Falcon 50" was rolled out at Bordeaux, and made its maiden flight on 7 Nov 76.
Development continued and the 3D wing was modified to the super critical wing, and first flew with this wing on 6 May 77.
Despite intense competition from American manufacturers, Falcon Jet Corporation made a successful bid to provide the United States Coast Guard (USCG) with a Medium Range Surveillance (MRS) aircraft to be known as the HU-25A, a derivative of the Falcon 20G.
The order for forty-one aircraft was confirmed on 7 Jan 77, and will in effect establish a new version of the Falcon 20 plus a new Garrett AiResearch turbofan likely to have a few applications in the executive transport and smaller airline field.
The USCG aircraft will have a number of special features and mission equipment, whereas the 20G for the commercial market will in general be a Series F with ATF3-6 engines rated at over 5,000 lbs thrust.
The order book for the Falcon 20 has now passed the 400 mark, and with the success of the Falcon 10 and the arrival of the Falcon 50, production from Dassault's Bordeaux facility for the next decade can confidently be expected.
Basic Data and Performance
The Falcon turbofan powered, high speed jet with:
Ample space for up to 10 passengers, their baggage, a galley and an airline type toilet.
Lowest interior and exterior noise level of any high speed business jet.
Standard APU, single point pressure refuelling and drag chute.
Very high structural integrity as evidenced by a 30,000 hour design life and no speed limit in turbulence.
Long range (over 2000 St. Mi. with Falcon "D" , "E" and "F" ) and high speed (up to M = .8).
There follows an explanation of the primary differences between the 4 models of the Falcon and also the basic performance and weight characteristics of each.
BASIC TECHNICAL INFORMATION
Certification
French under AIR 2.015 and U.S. under CAR 4 b with amendments 1  thru 12.
Transport category with up to 14 passengers and 3 crew.
Structure
Fail-safe, no fail designed for fatigue life in excess of 30,000 hours.
Powerplant
General Electric CF 700 aft fan turbojets 4,315 lb thrust — flat rated up to I.S.A. + 15 ° T.B.O.: 1,800 hours.
Fuel System
Total capacity: 1,340 U.S.gal. (5,092 l — 8,970 lb) on series E, 1,385 U.S. gal. (5,240 l — 9,240 lb) on series F. Pressurised integral tanks transferring by means of pumps or differential pressure into feeder tanks in rear fuselage.
Refuelling by gravity (single point pressure refuelling optional).
Not de-icing additive required — fuels authorized: JP 1 — JP 4 or aviation gasoline in case of emergency.
Flight Controls
Ailerons, rudder and elevator driven by twin hydraulic servo-actuators, and push-pull rod linkage.
Trims by offsetting null point on artificial feel units for ailerons and rudder.
Twin motor jack on stabilizer for pitch trim.
Not trim tabs, no spoilers.
Variable gearing changes aileron and elevator forces with airspeed Yaw damper is standard item but not flight limitation without.
Flaps, slotted, extended by hydraulic motor.
Flap extension automatically selects drooping leading edge down.
On FALCON F full span leading edge flaps.
Airbrakes extended by hydraulic actuators — no speed limitation for operation.
Brake parachute standard on all aircraft.
Air Conditioning
Air bled from engines controlled by a valve mixing hot and refrigerated flows.
Cold air provided by heat exchangers and expansion turbine is available to cabin and cockpit outlets.
Provisions are available for MICROTURBO SAPHIR II Auxiliary Power Unit to provide air conditioning and assume aircraft electrical loads with 9kW (300 amp.) generator, also authorised in flight up to 15,000ft.
Hydraulics
Two independent 3,000 p.s.i.
systems powered by two engine mounted pumps.
Pressure lines all stainless steel.
Each system supplies one body of the twin servos No 1 system supplies most ancillaries while No 2 system operates emergency landing gear extension and emergency brakes.
Transfer jack pressurizes No 1 system with No 2 pressure for limited number of operations.
Electrical pump can pressurize servo control branch of either system.
Fluid is MIL 5,606.
Pressurization
Two electrically controlled outflow valves maintain cabin at Sea Level up to 22,000 feet and 8,000 feet at 42,000 feet (Max. pressure differential 8.5 p.s.i.).
Cabin rate of climb can be sent by pilot.
Electricity
Two 40 amp/hour batteries and two 9 kW generators supply a 28 volt D.C. System.
Batteries allow six successive engine starts without help from A.P.U. or ground unit.
115 volt 400 cps A.C. system supplied by one 1,500 VA and one 750 VA inverter, a third 750 VA inverter is provided as stand-by.
Electrical fire switch allow cutting-off all non essential loads in one operation.
De-icing
Engine air inlets and wings leading edges de-iced with hot air.
System may operate continuously and from a single engine.
Wingshield panels and pilot heads heated electrically.
Rain repellent system increases wiper efficiency — hot air defogging on windshield.
Oxygen
76 Cu. ft/2,175 litre oxygen bottle — supplying crew and ten passenger drop-out masks.
EUROPE FALCON SERVICE
Europe Falcon Service, ICAO designation FK, was formed on 25 May 67 at Le Bourget as an AMD subsidiary and key support centre for Falcon customers in Europe, Africa, Asia and Australia.
Whilst EFS were in charge of maintenance and flight operations, Uni-jet, a specialised company with the world's first international business network, and EFS shareholder of whom Dassault has a share of the capital, is the commercial agent selling Falcon hours.
Uni-jet agents abroad include Publi-Air Belgium, Falcon Jet Centre UK, Itavia Italy, Air-Flight GmbH West Germany, Aerogulf Services UAE and others.
EFS commenced operations with two aircraft.
Expansion was rapid, as can be appreciated by reference to the number of hours flown annually.
In 1968 3,845, in 1973 10,419 and as at July 1977 the total flown hours was 69,171.
EFS provide service, support, technical and operational assistance, advise and assist the operation of Approved Service Centres, operate a CAMP computerised maintenance programme, and provide a training centre in conjunction with Flight Safety International.
As well as operating on behalf of industrial concerns, part of EFS' everyday operations are for Europ-Assistance the International holiday insurance company.
Tourists who are injured or fall sick are repatriated to their various countries.
The aircraft are easily converted for casualty evacuation, and can accommodate three stretcher patients, two attendants plus all the equipment required for intensive care.
Air France Crew Training 1966–8
Air France, like many airlines during this period, was expanding rapidly and transferring to jet equipment, and at the same time some ex-military wartime pilots were reaching retirement age.
The French airline contracted with AMD to operate the aircraft as pilot trainers for a minimum of six hours per day to pilots of various origins, civil and military.
The scheme commenced 18 Sep 66 initially with two aircraft, and three aircraft were added at periodic intervals.
F-BMSH, F-BMSS, F-BOED, F-BOEF, F-BOLX, F-BNRE and F-BOOA were all used in this scheme.
They were basically in standard configuration with these special modifications: blind flying curtain with quick release; a longitudinal attitude instrument to monitor pitch attitude; wiring provisions for the Failure Simulation Panel which allowed discreet introduction of twenty-nine failure by the instructor.
Instruments were, where possible, identical to those which Air France has standardised for their fleet, especially in the use of the Sperry Flight Director.
The programme had these objectives: Training for Commercial Pilot's Licence and Instrument Rating; Jet Transport Type Rating; Training to airline standards and procedures; Training for Airline Transport Pilot's Licence; Training of Flight Engineers; Instructor Training.
As confirmation of intense utilization and reliability, during Aug 68 the five aircraft achieved 230 flights, 799 landings, 2490 touch and go's and 737 flying hours.
Other statistics are equally as impressive.
The whole programme averaged five landings per hour, 140 landings per month, and in excess of 11000 hours being flown.
During the first two years 184 pilots, 43 instructors and 47 flight engineers completed their training.
Air France gained many improvements to their airline training programme by allowing them to: significantly reduce the duration of the training cycle, reduce the time between hiring the pilot and the point at which he is qualified for jet operations by at least one year, reduce type conversion hours by at least 10%, and make an improvement in the selection of pilots by providing a better assessment of trainee ability for heavy or medium jet aircraft.
The whole exercise was a clear demonstration of the unequalled capabilities of the Mystère 20 as an airline pilot trainer.
FEDERAL EXPRESS
the world's only small-package airline
From 1966 to 1969 Frederick W. Smith, Chairman of Federal Express Corp.
(FEC), served as a U.S. Marine Corps Company Commander, and completed two tours of duty in Vietnam, flying more than 230 combat mission and receiving 12 medals.
It was during this period that he conceived the idea of an airline devoted to small package shipments.
In 1969 he took over Arkansas Aviation (now Little Rock Airmotive, a subsidiary of FEC), an ailing sales operator in Little Rock.
By concentrating on a unique approach to the purchase and resale of business jet aircraft, he brought about a dramatic reversal in the profit picture.
This led in turn to the most highly successful venture in buying and selling of business aircraft the aviation industry had seen.
At the same time, he started research to explore the economic potential for a small package airline, and on completion of this research FEC was incorporated on 24 Jun 71 under the laws of the State of Delaware.
In less than two years FEC acquired thirty-three Falcon 20 aircraft, the majority from Pan Am's Business Jet Division.
Conversion to "Minifreighter Cargo Jet" configuration took place at Little Rock.
Apart from one another in Switzerland (c/n 208), it is the only cargo jet of its kind in the world, and is designed to operate at or below the noise emission standards established by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
The Falcon 20 freighter has the following specification: The distinctive purple, orange and white colour scheme of FEC jet is now a familiar sight at seventy-six major airports throughout the United States, and especially at Memphis, Tn., the company's headquarters.
Each night the Falcons depart from over 130 major market areas, jetting packages to a computerised sorting centre at Memphis, where they are sorted at the rate of 10,000 per hour.
Within seventy minutes each plane has been unloaded, reloaded and winging its way to destination cities.
Pittsburgh acts as a supplementary hub serving North Eastern markets.
The company offers six levels of service for shippers of small packages under 70lb., and for important documents.
Priority One Overnight delivery service.
Standard Air Service Second day delivery service.
Courier Pak Limited to 2lb., and to size and shape 12 in. x 15½ in., these are delivered to the consignee not later than noon on the day after pick-up.
Hazardous Materials Overnight service.
Signature Security Overnight service.
Company is authorised to handle secret material.
International Next day service to Canada.
FEC currently fly 10% of the world's Falcons, and as well as being a scheduled airline are engaged in several other aviation orientated enterprises.
The "PartsBank" service is widely recognised in the U.S. as the most unique transportation and distribution system for time sensitive inventories, which is especially suited to the electronic and computer industries.
PartsBank is a warehouse inventory service at Memphis requested part, which FEC can zip to any part of the U.S. in six hours.
Xerox Corp. is a major client.
FEC also operate an aircraft service facility performing scheduled and unscheduled maintenance, modifications and aircraft repairs, with special emphasis on the Falcon 20 aircraft.
As can be appreciated the use of these Falcons is stretched to the maximum, and it has been necessary to wet lease fifteen to eighteen aircraft (DC-3s, Learjets and Beech 18s) in order to fulfil commitments.
To eliminate multiple aircraft flights on the heavier routes FEC applied to the CAB to operate DC-9-15s, but met with tremendous opposition and their application was rejected.
Negotiations for the use of larger aircraft are continuing.
FEC have a conditional agreement with Canadair to buy twenty-five Challenger (LearStar) 600F cargo aircraft to supplement their Falcon fleet for operations in the 1980s.
With the cutbacks in schedules by major air carriers, especially to the smaller cities, it would appear that the future of FEC is guaranteed, and their Minifreighters will continue scheduled door to door overnight deliveries of small packages between major U.S. markets.
All FEC Falcons carry a girls name.
These were drawn by lottery from the daughters' names of FEC employees.
 "Falcon Jet Mystery" — Nav Error or Sabotage?
The crash of a Fanjet Falcon (Registration N888AR) north of Acapulco, Mexico, on 7 Aug 76 has been attributed by Mexican authorities to "erroneous report of position and failure to follow the authorised Llegada Norte (north arrival) procedure" .
The aircraft, owned by Colonial Alliance Corp., New York, N.Y., and operated under lease by Hansa Jet Corp. of Ft.
Lauderdale, Fla., was on a direct IFR flight from Houston to Acapulco, carrying pilot, co-pilot and a single passenger.
On an instrument descent while under approach control, the Falcon let down into the side of a mountain, killing all three occupants.
The scene of the 2.30am. accident was at an elevation of 7,000 ft. in a large mountain range of the Western Sierra Madre, partly covered by large trees and with a slope of 50 deg. and at 42 nmi from the Acapulco VOR.
According to the findings of investigators of the Mexican General Civil Aeronautics Administration, the pilot last reported his position as 35 DME miles from the ACA VOR at 14,000 ft.
In reconstructing the circumstances of the crash, the Mexican investigators concluded that the Falcon was actually 40 miles further away from ACA VOR than it had reported — i.e., it was at 75 nmi when the pilot reported 35 nmi.
(Perhaps he mistook the seven on his DME indicator for a three?)
During that communication, the pilot received and acknowledged instructions to maintain an altitude of 13,000 ft. until reaching the Toro intersection (some 13 nmi south of the accident site), whereupon he was to begin his descent to 8,000 ft, at Maria intersection and then follow the Llegada Norte arrival procedure into ACA.
 "The elevation of the accident site (7,000ft.) reveals that the pilot did not follow the established procedure," according to the investigator's report.
Weather Not a Factor
The report also disclosed that both the pilot and the controller on duty in the tower complained or poor reception of transmissions, apparently affected by bad atmospheric conditions.
However, the report further states, that in the course of communications between the pilot and Acapulco Approach and the Mexico City Control Centre, at not time did the pilot mention that his instruments, engines or flight systems were defective or functioning improperly.
Weather was said not to be a factor.
From the above report it would appear as either:(1) a classic case of simple but unforgivable navigation error, or (2) on-board or ground DME malfunction.
The first seems less likely since the pilots were experienced and known to be very competent and they had been well briefed (by professional weather service) on the ACA arrival and approach procedures.
However, they had never flown into ACA before.
The second seems more likely since the Mexican navaids don't have a great record for reliability.
It's doubtful that the on-board DME was in error since there were two on board and the pilots could have suspected a malfunction were the readings substantially different.
A train of events that happened subsequent to the accident has opened a Pandora's box of intrigue and present some evidence (though most of it is speculative and much erroneous) that the airplane was sabotaged.
Two weeks after the accident, the American Bank & Trust Co. collapsed.
As a result its depositors are likely to lose an estimated $50 million.
Investigators belatedly found that the head of the bank, 35-year old Robert Gravier, had been bilking it for millions.
They also found that this same Robert Gravier was reported to have chartered the ill-fated Falcon Jet N888AR from Hansa Jet to take him from LaGuardia Airport, New York, to Acapulco.
Here is where the intrigue started.
Was the crash of the Falcon with, supposedly, Gravier on board, and the almost immediate subsequent crash of his bank just coincidental?
Or were they inextricably related?
It was strictly out of Mickey Spillane and James Bond.
Barron's Suggests Sabotage
Barron's National Business and Financial Weekly, on of the financial district's most respected and oldest papers, in its Dec 27th issue did a major article on the subject claiming that the plane was sabotaged by either Gravier or by people whom he had swindled.
Barron's case is based mainly on these elements:[1]Immediately after the crash some members of Gravier's family came from Mexico City to the site to identify his body and rushed it off for cremation.
Since Gravier was Jewish and cremation is in violation of Jewish religious tenets, it was highly irregular that his family would have his remains cremated. [2]There were both voice and flight recorders on the airplane.
Neither has been found.
[3]The Mexican authorities claimed that tapes of the pilot-to-controller communications were erased. [4]NTSSB was not invited (as is customary) to participate in the accident investigation.
[5]A photo in a Mexican newspaper shows part of the fuselage sitting amid upright trees in a dense forest.
Had the airplane crashed into the mountain, it would have cut a swath through the trees.
Therefore, it probably fell out of the sky after an in-flight explosion.
Based mainly on the above elements, Barron's claims one of three possibilities:(1) Gravier intentionally blew up the airplane;(2) He slipped out of the Falcon during a refuelling stop leaving a bomb hidden in the airplane;(3) He was killed (presumably at a fuel stop) prior to the crash and whoever did it told the pilots he was asleep.
(A fourth possibility, others have suggested, is that Gravier never was on the airplane at all, but he sent an aide in his place using his name to deliver a package in which there was a bomb.
Then once having disposed of the bogus Robert Gravier, the real Mr G. could live on his swindled millions without fear of being chased by the law or his many creditors.
Some stories saying that Gravier has recently been seen in Miami and Argentina are advanced to support this theory.)
Aviation Convention News did some investigative reporting on its own.
Here's what we came up with: Gravier chartered the Jet from the Hansa Jet operation.
The Jet was owned by Colonial Alliance of New York City, and was both managed and operated by Hansa Jet of Ft.
Lauderdale.
Gravier paid Hansa in advance — about $10,000 by certified check.
He had chartered and paid for a Learjet from the Hansa operation two weeks before for the same trip, LaGuardia to Acapulco.
Different pilots made the trip, which was routine.
Gravier's wife and child and parents had been waiting for him at Acapulco.
When they learned of the crash, his brother and father came to the crash site.
No positive identification could be made of the bodies, Mexican sources at the crash site informed ACN.
Gravier's brother made his identification on circumstantial evidence and it wasn't until two days later he had the remains cremated and that occurred in Mexico City.
The photo of the so-called "fuselage" amid upright trees was actually that of the tail section.
Another photo showed that the aircraft had clipped off the tops of at least two tree before it impacted (at an estimated 350 kts.) the 50-deg. upsloping rock-encrusted mountainside.
Investigators at the scene concluded that the airplane was unmistakably in level flight when it hit.
Flight Recorders Missing
Falcon N888AR had voice and flight recorders installed in its tail.
They were not found.
This is probably the most substantive evidence in support of the conspiracy/sabotage theory.
These recorders are built to take about 100 Gs, and the tail of the airplane was found pretty much intact.
Why the NTSB was not invited to participate in the investigation by the Mexican authorities is not known.
NTSB told ACN it actually had the right by international agreement to make its own investigation, but that, by protocol, it normally waits until invited by the country in which the accident of a U.S. registered airplane occurs.
Since there are so many alleged dope smugglers languishing in Mexican jails, some claimed to be unjustly accused, relations between the U.S. and Mexico have been taut of late.
This may have been the reason why no invitation was proffered.
The bank fraud aspects of this case have brought in the FBO who are also pursuing the sabotage angle.
FBI agents have obtained photos of Gravier and both pilots and have visited the bases of LGA, NEM and HOU where the jet refuelled.
It is not known whether positive identifications have been obtained.
CANADIAN DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT
Air Services — Civil Aviation Branch
ACCIDENT REPORT
Serial F 469
AIRCRAFT: Dassault Mystère DA20, HB-VAP [s/n 37-Ed.]
PLACE: near Goose Bay Airport, Labrador (Lat.53°20'N; Long.
60° 14'W)
DATE: 1 October 1967 1336 hours.
All times in this report are Atlantic Standard Time
SUMMARY
The aircraft was on the second leg of a trans-Atlantic flight from Europe to Canada via Iceland, with two pilots and five passengers on board.
On the flight from Iceland to Goose Bay both engines failed about seven miles short of the destination airport due to fuel exhaustion and a forced landing was made.
The occupants were uninjured, but the aircraft was substantially damaged.
INVESTIGATION
A Swiss Certificate of Airworthiness had been issued for the aircraft and no evidence was found that any fault existed in the engines, airframe or controls prior to the accident.
The pilot-in-command held a West German Commercial Pilot Licence with instrument and instructor ratings endorsed as valid for flying Swiss registered aircraft and had accumulated a total of 2,600 hours flying experience, including 400 hours on the accident type.
During the ninety day period preceding the accident he had flown 140 hours, of which seventy-five hours were on the accident type.
He had completed nine westerly trans-Atlantic crossings.
The co-pilot held a West German Commercial Pilot Licence with instrument and instructor ratings, and had accumulated a total of 2,550 hours flying experience including fifty hours on the accident he had flown 120 hours, of which fifty hours were on the accident type.
Both pilots had been off duty for a period of approximately thirty-five hours prior to the trans-Atlantic flight and had flown a total of just over seven hours on the day of the accident.
The weather, observed at Goose Bay Airport a few minutes after the accident, was scattered cloud at 800 feet, overcast cloud at 3,400 feet, visibility ten miles, temperature 54°F, dewpoint 53° F and the wind 325° M at seven knots.
The weather conditions existing on the route between Iceland and Goose Bay are discussed later in this report.
The accident occurred in a level swamp area five miles east of Goose Bay Airport.
In some areas of the swamp there are growths of small evergreen trees up to ten feet in height.
The first apparent point of impact was a small tree which was broken off three feet above the ground and from his point the aircraft travelled over a clear area for 420 feet on a heading of 183°M.
The final heading of the aircraft was 163°M.
The impact angle was very shallow and the aircraft was apparently under some control as it settled only three feet over a horizontal distance of 420 feet.
According to the pilots' statements and other available evidence the aircraft departed from Keflavik, Iceland, at 0924 hours, for a flight to Goose Bay.
The planned altitude was 31,000 feet and the estimated time  en route three hours and fifty minutes with fuel endurance calculated to be four hours and forty minutes.
The flight planned speed was mach-70 and the alternate airport Sondrestrom, Greenland.
The southern tip of Greenland, known as Prince Christian, was to be used as a decision point where it would be decided whether enough fuel remained to proceed to Goose  Bay or whether it would be necessary to proceed to the alternate.
The air traffic control clearance at Keflavik specified that the aircraft maintain an altitude of 28,000′ and this altitude was flown until near Prince Christian.
No position report was transmitted at Prince Christian and the pilot did not have a record of the time of passage.
He states however that the fuel was computed at that point and it was determined that there should have been 1,300 lbs remaining on arrival over Goose Bay, giving a reserve of twenty-five to twenty-seven minutes holding at 20,000 feet altitude.
Position reports transmitted from the aircraft indicate that it was one minute ahead of flight plan times at 30°W longitude, one minute behind flight plan at 40°W longitude, and seven minutes behind flight plan at 50°W longitude.
The original flight planned altitude of 31,000 feet was requested by radio on several occasions and the Oceanic Control Centre indicated that a higher altitude could be expected at 50°W longitude.
The aircraft passed 50°W longitude at 1150 hours and at that time communications could not be established, the aircraft was cleared to climb to 33,000 feet and this altitude was reached at 1217 hour.
At 1252 hour, the aircraft established contact with Goose Bay Air Traffic Control, was identified by radar and given the local weather.
An air traffic control clearance was issued in which the aircraft was cleared to the Goose VOR and maintain 6,000 feet.
At approximately 1302 hours the aircraft was instructed to change to Goose terminal control frequently at which time the aircraft was about 110 nautical miles from Goose Bay.
At 1325 hours, when about 40 nautical miles from Goose Bay, the crew of the aircraft were advised that they were very short on fuel and were making a rapid descent for straight-in approach to runway 27.
Two minutes later the crew again indicated that they were very short on fuel and requested a short approach.
The aircraft was given radar vectors for a straight-in GCA approach to runway 27.
At 1333 hours, the crew advised that the airport was in sight.
At 1334 hours, the GCA final controller noted that aircraft was going low in the glide path at 7 miles.
He called the aircraft and was advised that both engines had flamed out and that a forced landing would be necessary.
A turn to the left off the runway heading was made to bring the aircraft over land for the forced landing.
The aircraft crew did not declare an emergency during the flight, however the approach to Goose Bay was straight-in with no restrictions or delays.
The flight plan was recalculated using the stated cruise speed of mach.70, the available fuel and load information and the forecast winds obtained by the crew.
It was calculated that the estimated time  en route would have been approximately three hours and thirty-one minutes with a fuel reserve of thirty-two minutes if the flight was flown at an altitude of 31,000 feet, and a fuel reserve of nineteen minutes if the flight was flown at 28,000 feet.
Examination of the aircraft position reports reveal that the aircraft most probably encountered considerably stronger head winds than forecast, particularly on the leg from Prince Christian to Goose Bay.
An aftercast of the winds and study of the Canadian forecast for the period of the flight reveals the presence of a jet stream between 33,000 and 35,000 feet on the latter part of the route with winds up to 134 knots.
The aircraft would have crossed this jet stream at a shallow angle which would have resulted in considerably reduced ground speed.
The forecast issued at Keflavik did not mention this jet stream.
It is not know whether the Canadian forecast was available to the crew before departure from Keflavik although it had been issued prior to that time.
Canadian regulations require a flight operating under instrument flight rules to carry sufficient fuel for flight to the destination, thence to an alternate airport, plus forty-five minutes reserve, unless otherwise specifically authorised.
It is apparent that even with the forecast winds used by the crew the flight was undertaken with marginal fuel reserves which were insufficient to take care of possible navigation errors, air traffic control delays, changes of planned altitude or variance in forecast winds.
PROBABLE CAUSE
Inadequate pre-flight and in-flight planning.
National Transportation Safety Board, Washington DC. 20591
Accident Resume Report
To Dassault/Fan-Jet (Falcon 20 s/n43) Registration N990L
Place/Date/Time: Grand Prairie, Texas.
3 Mar 75. 0649 CDT.
Owner/Operator: LTV Aerospace Corp.
Box 5907, Dallas, Texas, 75222.
Crew: Pilot David C. Alm (Serious Injuries) Co-pilot Aaron L. Powell (Serious Injuries).
Aircraft Damage: Substantial.
Passengers: 3—no injuries
The flight originated at Navy Dallas, Grand Prairie, Texas, for an IFR cross-country flight to Washington, D.C. The flight crew could not rotate the aircraft for lift off during the takeoff roll on Runway 17, 8,000 feet in length.
Engine operation was normal and airspeed developed above rotation speed.
The flight crew aborted the takeoff, however, could not stop the aircraft on the wet runway.
The skid marks were evident on the last 750 feet of runway travel.
The aircraft crossed the overrun, rolled down an embankment for an additional 250 feet into Mountain Creek Lake and came to rest fifty feet off shore.
Examination of the aircraft revealed the horizontal stabilizer was in the full travel nose-down position and beyond the micro switch stop.
Normal takeoff position is 4° nose up.
The complete normal and emergency stabilizer trim systems operated normally when functionally checked on the aircraft after the accident.
The aircraft was not equipped with a take-off-out-of-trim warning device.
Just prior to the flight a 300-hour inspection had been performed on the aircraft which calls for full travel of the horizontal stabilizer in both directions.
The aircraft takeoff weight was at maximum gross of 26,455 lbs.
and C.G. was at 21.8% MAC; normal range is 20.3% to 25.1% at gross takeoff weight.
Weather was measured 600 feet broken, 4,000 feet overcast, visibility seven miles, temperature 38°F, Dew Point 37° F, wind 360° at six knots, altimeter 30.26, drizzle ended at 0648.
Department of Transport NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD Extract from Factual Aircraft Accident Report
ACCIDENT REPORT
Type of Aircraft: Dassault/Sud FanJet Falcon
Registration Mark: N805F
Serial No: 60
Date: 5 Jul 71
Place: Boca Raton, Palm Beach, Florida
History of Flight
The corporate aircraft departed White Plains, N.Y., at 1116 on an IFR flight plan to Boca Raton, Florida to enplane passengers for a return flight to White Plains.
The flight was conducted at 39,000 feet and the crew cancelled the instrument flight plan in the vicinity of the Palm Beach, Florida VORTAC facility while descending through 10,5000 feet.
The co-pilot was flying the aircraft and the flight continued to the Boca Raton Airport and entered the traffic pattern for a left-hand approach to Runway 04.
On the base leg the captain took control of the aircraft and retarded the throttles.
In doing so, he inadvertently moved the throttle levers aft of the idle stop into the fuel shutoff position.
An airstart attempt was unsuccessful and the aircraft touched down on the extended landing gear at a point 900 feet short of the runway pavement.
Both main landing gears separated when the aircraft struck a three to four foot high sand bank 850 feet short of the runway pavement.
The fuselage broke into three major sections when it separated at the wing leading edge and wing trailing edge and the wreckage came to a stop 625 feet short of the runway pavement.
A non-occupant was overcome by fuel fumes and required hospitalization after he rushed to the scene and assisted the crew out of the wreckage.
Department of Trade ACCIDENTS INVESTIGATION BRANCH Extract from Civil Aircraft Accident Report No.24/74 (EW/C473)
ACCIDENT REPORT
Aircraft: Avions Marcel Dassault Fan Jet Falcon
Registration Mark: LN-FOE [serial No.62-Ed.]
Engines: 2 General Electric CF700-2C
Owner & Operator: Fred Olsen Air Transport Limited, Oslo, Norway
Commander: Captain H. Massin — Injured
Crew: Two — Injured
Passengers: Six — Uninjured
Place of Accident: Near Norwich Airport, Norfolk
Date & Time: 12 December 1973 at 1538 hours [GMT — Ed.]
Summary
The aircraft flew into a large flock of seagulls just after take-off, and sustained multiple bird strikes.
Both engines failed due to bird ingestion and the aircraft made a forced landing in a field beyond the end of the runway.
The aircraft was substantially damaged and the three crew were injured; the six passengers were not hurt.
Investigation
History of the flight
The aircraft was on charter to fly passengers from Norwich to Gothenburg, Sweden, and during the morning of 12 Dec 73 it made an uneventful positioning flight from Oslo, Norway, to Norwich where it landed at 1228 hours.
The six passengers boarded the aircraft at about 1520 hours and the aircraft received clearance from Norwich Tower to taxi out for take-off on Runway 28.
While  taxi-ing the crew received an airways clearance and the aircraft was lined up on the runway without delay.
The co-pilot, a qualified commander on this type of aircraft, was in the left hand  pilot's seat, and the aircraft commander in the right hand seat.
No bird flocks were seen by either of the pilots whilst  taxi-ing to the active runway.
The aircraft took-off at 1537 hours piloted from the left hand seat; on becoming airborne, at a position a little over halfway down the runway, the crew saw a flock of birds ahead flying just above the ground.
The pilot increased slightly the aircraft's climb altitude and the flock passed underneath.
A few seconds later a second flock was seen at a higher level and directly in the aircraft's flight path.
The pilot lowered the aircraft nose and the flock passed overhead.
On re-establishing the climb and at a height of between 100 and 200 feet a third flock was seen, again directly ahead.
This flock extended from ground level to well above the aircraft and there was no possible way for the pilot to avoid it; almost immediately the crew heart the sound of multiple bird strikes on the aircraft, the commander described the noise "like a machine gun" .
The pilot maintained the aircraft in the clime attitude and the commander, who was checking the aircraft's instruments, noticed the RPM on both engines running down very fast, he also observed the engined pressure ratio (EPR), and exhaust gas temperature (EGT) instrument readings dropping.
The pilot heard a bang from the engines, followed by the sound of the engines running down in a rough and abnormal manner.
He quickly asked if both engines had failed.
This was confirmed by the commander who tried to move the thrust levers without any response from the engines.
By this time the aircraft was at a height of approximately 300 feet with the landing gear still down, the crew not having had time to select it up because of their preoccupation with avoiding the bird flocks.
The speed, which had been about 150 knots prior to the bird strikes, had dropped to 135 knots.
The control column was eased forward to maintain speed and the aircraft began to lose height.
The pilot saw a field ahead and slightly left of the aircraft which he considered the best forced landing area.
On receiving confirmation of his decision from the commander, the pilot made a turn to the left and lined up the aircraft for an approach to the selected field.
Visibility was not good because of approaching darkness but the crew were able to see some trees at the approach end of the field.
These were avoided and a positive touch down made; the stall warning sounded just before the aircraft hit ground.
Battery and fuel switches were turned off either just before or after ground impact and an attempt was made to close the thrust levers, but these would not move.
All three landing gear legs were torn off shortly after ground impact and the aircraft finally came to rest on the belly of the fuselage.
The commander, although partially blinded by blood from cuts on his head, made his way to the main cabin door, which he opened, and all occupants were evacuated.
Conclusions
(a) Findings
(i) The aircraft had been properly maintained and its documentation was in order.
(ii) The crew were properly licensed and adequately experienced for the flight.
(iii) Prior to take-off no concentration of birds was seen on the airport by that aircraft crew or by ATC personnel in the tower.
(iv) A large concentration of seagulls was either on the active runway of was arriving over the airport at the time of take-off.
(v) The aircraft suffered multiple bird strikes immediately after take-off and both engines failed due to bird ingestion.
(vi) The crew made a successful forced landing in a field near the end of the runway and are to be commended for the high degree of professional and airmanship displayed.
(vii) During the forced landing the aircraft was substantially damaged but the passengers did not suffer any appreciable injuries; the three crew members suffered varying degrees of injury.
(b) Cause The accident was caused by failure of both engines because of mechanical damage due to bird ingestion.
PHILAIR
Philair the Flight Division of Philips was formed in 1955 and commenced operations with a Beech 18S registered PH-LPS.
This well known registration has appeared on many Philips' aircraft in the past, and is now current on Falcon 20s/n 63.
Since 1955 Philair, operating like a small airline from its Southern Holland Eindhoven base, and with a variety of aircraft, has flown 83657 hours, as at June 77, made 76,267 flights, carried 266,090 passengers and 77,400 kgs freight.
Today, as well as providing transport for its own executives, it is involved with the industrial concern Flying Syndicate Welschap, which is a co-operative association enabling shared ownership of business aircraft.
Although development of scheduled air services from Eindhoven has reduced the need for Philair to transport relatively large numbers of employees on short sectors, it is still able to achieve its objectives by saving time, giving a quality service, providing a flexibility of movement, and offering its customers a personal service not easily achieved on public transport.
Philair currently operate four Falcons (63,147,266 and 326) and several twin turboprop aircraft.
Any future fleet changes are likely to reflect the importance of improved productivity, noise reduction and fuel economy.
CANADIAN ARMED FORCES
412 (Transport) Squadron — 412e Escadron de Transport
Since obtaining its identity as No 412 (Transport) Squadron at Rockcliffe on 1 Apr 49, the principal role of the squadron has always been to provide transportation for high level military and government personnel.
The squadron, which moved to Uplands in 1955, has over the years operated a variety of transport aircraft, viz North Stars, a C-5, Comet 1As, Yukons and Cosmopolitans.
In 1967–8 the Yukons were being phased out and an aircraft was needed to supplement the Cosmopolitans.
The first Falcon accepted at the 1967 Paris Salon arrived in May 1967, and soon filled the role of a quick, safe and dependable link between North American and overseas cities, and especially between Ottawa and Winnipeg, the Western anchor of Canadian defence.
In the latter years the Falcons owned by the Department of National Defence were seen as an un-necessary and additional expense to the Ministry of Transport JetStars, and at this point in time their future is uncertain.
The CAR are studying the feasibility of converting them to electronic warfare trainers.
The modifications would include the installation of ECM equipment and training consoles in each aircraft.
The 412 Squadron badge depicts a "falcon volant" , selected as it is a bird indigenous to all parts of Canada.
Known for its skill and aggressiveness in dealing with its enemies it has been used for hunting from an early date in history.
Falcon 20 "Sensor Platform" 
Remote Sensing Inc. was founded in Feb 1969 by Bobby Hile an electronic physicist, who used his experience gained with NASA to pioneer the commercial us of airborne space technology.
RSI, by the use of an infrared (IR) line scanner, microwave radiometer, radar scatterometer and two sophisticated versions of the familiar optical camera offered a complete range of airborne remote sensing techniques, particularly as they may be applied to natural resources management.
Activities included geological survey and mapping, determining sea state conditions, monitoring water pollution, detecting plant diseases, census of game animals, survey and mapping projected or existing pipelines, and measuring Arctic permafrost.
The instruments and methods used could also reveal important subsurface details such as rockbeds, voids and underground water.
With these on-board sensors and airframe structural modifications, s/n 157 (N166RS) was at the time the most expensive Falcon in the world, costing 2.5 million dollars.
The distinctive green and gold colour scheme were those of Arkansas Polytechnic College, Bobby Hile's alma mater.
Reference to the production history of Falcon s/n 157 will confirm that the aircraft eventually found its way into the Canadian Armed Forces (designated "CC117" ), where it was operated by the Airborne Sensing Unit (ASU), from Uplands CFB, Ottawa, Ontario.
When the ASU was discontinued as a unit in Oct 75, the work continued from Ottawa under contract with Innotech Aviation of Montreal.
Falcon s/n 157 then reverted to civilian registration marks, carrying C-GRSD-X at first, and later losing the -X suffix, to become C-GRSD.
Falcon Jet Corporation
By May 72 the total number of aircraft to be supported, and the forecast future sales for additional aircraft, required closer co-ordination between the manufacturer and major sales network.
To this end, Pan American and Avions Marcel Dassault agreed to form a joint venture company to take over Pan Am's responsibility for the marketing and support of the Fan Jet Falcon in the Wester Hemisphere and Far East.
Following approval by the U.S. Civil Aeronautics Board in the summer of 1972, Falcon Jet Corporation was formed and commenced operations from Teterboro Airport on 1 Dec 72.
In 1974 Falcon Jet acquired Little Rock Airmotive, Ar., which is now the Little Rock Division of Falcon Jet Corp.
This facility receives "green" Falcon 10 and 20 aircraft direct from France, and installs interiors and avionics, and also paints and delivers direct to the corporate customer.
It will do the same for the Falcon 50 when deliveries commence in 1979, and will also handle retrofits to 20G standard.
The Coast Guard contract has initiated the formation of a Guardian Group at Little Rock.
This will be completely separate from civil Falcon operations, and as well as managing the USCG programme will market and deliver the export versions of the HU-25A.
Japan Air Lines Pilot Training
A pilot training programme initiated by Falcon Jet Center (FJC) and Flight Safety International (FSI) was designed to provide a pool of second officer trainees with airline jet experience for Japan Air Lines.
Students having already completed primary flight training carried out by IASCO at Napa, Ca. in Piper Arrows and Aztecs (225 hours), and a two month ground school in Tokyo, were now ready for the FJC/FSI programme.
Jet Training consisted of an intensive two month course which provided sixteen hours simulation at FSI's LaGuardia facility, followed by twenty-five hours flight time from Teterboro in JAL's three Falcons (282, 284 and 290).
These aircraft were specially configured for instrument lay out and training capabilities allied to DC-8 operating procedures.
All flights were conducted in the New York Terminal Area.
The cockpit of the JAL Falcon with its airline type instrument panel accommodates four crew members.
The pilot trainee in the left hand seat, with the flight-instructor in the right hand seat, who has access to twelve key locked emergency simulation switches.
The co-pilot sits on a jump seat just aft of the pedestal, from where he operates all of the normal controls within reach, and indicates those out of reach to the instructor.
Directly behind the pilot sits an observer.
On completion of the course, graduates went directly to JAL's ground school in Tokyo for transition as DC-8 second officers.
Some were selected for B747 operation with equal success.
The three Falcons have flown in excess of 15,000 hours and more than 350 students have graduated.
Like Air France during 1966–1968, JAL too, have found the Falcon to be an excellent aircraft for airline type training.
Falcon 20G MRS HU-25A and Guardian
The prototype of the United States Coast Guard's Medium Range Surveillance HU-25A special missions derivative of the 20G, to replace existing piston HU-16 aircraft, is scheduled for flight testing in the Spring of 1978.
Initially Standard GE engines will be used pending the certification of the Garrett ATF3-6-2c engines.
Deliveries complete with Collins avionics will be at the rate of one per month commencing in Jul 1979.
Manufactured sub-assemblies will be shipped from France to Falcon Jet Corporation's facility at Little Rock for assembly and outfitting to USCG specification.
Modifications for the HU-25A will include the installation of a wide range of communications and navigational equipment to handle the expanded role of the Coast Guard.
Also a side looking radar, a reconnaissance camera, electro-mechanically operated drop-escape hatch, a surveillance systems console, a large observer window plus changes in the environmental control, electrical and hydraulic systems.
Crew will normally comprise eight members, which will include two pilots, a Surveillance Systems Operator at a fully equipped console and two observers at search window stations.
The special missions will fall into one of these main categories, viz search and rescue, pollution surveillance, law enforcement of U.S.A. territorial waters and the 200 miles fishery conversation zone.
In addition each aircraft will be capable of carrying an oil pollution detection system.
The "Guardian" is the FJC/AMD designation of the USCG aircraft to be used in promoting sales to other countries.
At the time of writing (Oct 77) the Japanese MSDF are said to be interested in fifteen aircraft to replace its mixed fleet of thirty-four prop driven aircraft.
For commercial usage it is anticipated that a new 20G (F with ATF3-6 engines) production model will be available from Bordeaux in 1980.
Meanwhile, retrofits of existing Falcons to G standard will be available once USCG deliveries are underway.
The C D and E variants after completion of retrofit will be designated 20EG, and the series F designated 20G.