

INTRODUCTION
Compiling a book about Motor Racing records is not difficult because it is a sport that has been well documented, statistically, over the years.
The hard part was deciding what to put in and what to leave out.
A starting point was easy and naturally "pole position" went to the Formula One Grand Prix World Championship.
But thereafter the task got increasingly harder.
Apologies are made to those branches of the sport not covered, Formula Ford, Hill Climbing, and so on.
Their role within the sport is, however, acknowledged as a vital one and must never be forgotten.
However, I have chosen to complement the Formula One statistics with coverage of the European Formula Two and Formula 3000 Championships which, like Formula Three, have been excellent breeding grounds for many of today's top Formula One drivers.
Detailed coverage of Sports Car races is also included as the Sports Car still has its special appeal and aura.
Because of the increase in popularity of racing across the Atlantic, extensive coverage of NASCAR and CART championships are included for the first time.
And not forgotten are great series from the past — the Can-Am challenges and the Australian Tasman Cup.
Hopefully the blend of modern day coverage with a sprinkling of nostalgia and feature spreads will make interesting reading in one of the most comprehensively compiled statistical books on Motor Racing.
HISTORY OF MOTOR RACING
As man has always had the desire to compete, whether by running against one another, or throwing further than another man, it was obvious that with the advent of the motor car in the 19th-century, another form of rivalry would soon start.
The first ever race under mechanical power was believed to be the 31km (19.3 miles) La Velocipede race around Paris in 1887.
It was won by Count Jules Felix Philippe Albert de Dion at an average speed of 59 kph (37mph).
By the turn of the century road races were being held regularly, using Paris as a base, and the first real race was from Paris to Bordeaux, and back, in June 1895.
With competition becoming intense the first set of Motor Racing rules were drawn up for the Paris-Amsterdam-Paris race of 1898.
Manufacturers were producing bigger and more powerful cars, and the rules, although crude, divided the cars into two categories — heavyweight and lightweight — those over 400 kg (882lb) being classed as heavyweight.
The first great series of races, and forerunner to Grands Prix, was the Gordon Bennett series, introduced in 1900 and it was a real test of a manufacturer's skills, as the rules stipulated that all parts of each competing car had to be manufactured in its country of origin.
Despite regulations regarding design, the sport was becoming dangerous as engines were built to be more powerful and, following the abandonment of the 1903 Paris-Madrid race due to many accidents, notably to pedestrians, road racing was banned.
The sport moved to enclosed circuits such as Athy in Northern Ireland, and Taunus in Germany.
The Gordon Bennett races made way for the first Grand Prix in 1906 when Szisz of Romania won the inaugural French Grand Prix at Le Mans.
The race was open to all-corners but the organizers felt a need for some control and imposed a weight limit of 1000 kg (2204lb).
Many manufacturers felt the production of cars was becoming costly and as a result the sport dwindled slightly in Europe but after the Americans introduced the famous Indianapolis 500 in 1911, interest picked up again on the continent.
Although the French Grand Prix was revived in 1912, it was not till after the war that it developed rapidly.
Other countries followed France and staged Grands Prix, including Britain at the famous purpose-built Brooklands circuit.
One of the world's great races was born in 1923, when the first Le Mans 24-hour race was held.
Four years later the most famous of all road races, the Mille Miglia, was created.
The inter-war era saw the birth of some great cars, none of which could match the elegance and speed of the Type 35 Bugatti which first appeared in 1924, and was to be credited with more than 2000 wins during its life-time.
Great cars helped to develop great drivers and wealthy Britons Lord Howe and Sir Henry Birkin were two of the many aristocrats that tried their hand at the sport.
But it was on the continent that the cream of the drivers could be found.
Louis Chiron (Fra) Hermann Lang (Ger) and Rudolf Caracciola (Ger) were three of the leading drivers of the era but the greatest of all drivers before the second war was Italy's Tazio Nuvolari.
The legendary Enzo Ferrari rates him the best driver ever, and coming from the man with Ferrari's wealth of experience and knowledge, he must be right.
The great strides forward by the manufacturers led to stringent controls over sizes of engine, car etc, which changed regularly.
A 3-litre capacity was imposed in 1921, this was reduced to 2 litres in 1922.
The carrying of the riding mechanic, which was vital at one time, was dropped in 1925 because of its danger.
The engine capacity was reduced even further, to 1½ litres in 1926 but then a Formula Libre, with no engine size legislation, came into force in 1928.
Restriction were re-introduced in 1938 which limited supercharged engines to 3-litres, and unsupercharged engines to 4½ litres.
After the war the supercharged capacity was reduced to 1½ litres.
Formula Two was introduced in 1947 to cater for the new breed of younger driver who wanted to break into the sport but could not afford to get into Grand Prix racing.
Formula Two soon became a great grooming ground and was, for many years, a nursery for the leading Formula One drivers of the future.
The original Formula Two restriction were for 2000cc cars unsupercharged, or 500cc supercharged.
Formula Three was born in 1950 but more   significantly, that year saw the birth of the Formula One driver's championship.
Seven races made up the first championship and the first was run at Silverstone on Saturday, 13 May 1950.
The race, and the first year's championship, was won by Dr Giuseppe Farina (Ita) in his Alfa Romeo.
Alfa drivers also occupied second and third places in the championship through Juan Manuel Fangio (Arg) and Luigi Fagioli (Ita).
It was the Argentinian Fangio who was to dominate the early years of the championship, winning the titles on a record five occasion between 1951–57.
Continental manufacturers like Ferrari, Mercedes-Benz and Maserati were invincible in the early years of the championship but, when the first championship for manufacturers was introduced in 1958, it was the British-made Vanwall that took the title.
Further changes in Grand Prix rules had been made, and in 1952 and 1953 the World Championship was run to Formula Two rules.
When it reverted to Formula One rules in 1954, new limits of 750cc for supercharged engines, and 2500cc for unsupercharged engines were imposed.
The unpopular 1½ litre formula was introduced in 1961 but this was increased in 1966 to 1½ litres supercharged, 3 litres unsupercharged.
Manufacturers were looking at different techniques in an effort to beat off their rivals.
Colin Chapman introduced his gas powered turbine Lotus 56B in 1971 and Ken Tyrell his famous 6-wheeled Project 34 in 1976.
But the appearance of the turbocharged Renault at the 1977 British Grand Prix was most significant.
Initially viewed with doubt, it was not long, however, before most manufacturers were following the French team's lead and developing turbo-charged engines.
The power produced by turbo-chargers greatly increased the engine's output.
Consequently, greater speeds enhanced danger.
The governing body therefore announced further changes in legislation in 1986 which have meant the phasing out of turbocharging completely at the end of the 1988 season.
With or without turbochargers, Motor Racing has produced some great drivers.
In the two year prior to instituting of the 1½ litre formula in 1961, the Cooper-Climax, driven by Jack Brabham, swept all before them as the Australian installed himself as one of the all-time greats, first as a driver, and later as a constructor.
Mike Hawthorn had become Britain's first World Champion in 1958 but the great British monopoly of the World Championship started in 1962 when   Graham Hill won the first of his two titles, but then perhaps the greatest driver of the modern era, Jim Clark, won the first of his two titles in 1963.
John Surtees kept the British flag flying in 1964, before Clark won his second title a year later.
In 1968, however, that rare talent of Clark's was taken from the sport when he lost his life in an inexplicable accident during a Formula Two race at West Germany's Hockenheim circuit.
Britain's Jackie Stewart carried on where Clark left off and, had it not been for a decision to retire early, could have dominated the sport longer than he did, and could well have added to his collection of three world titles.
Britain's share of the glory is long overdue.
Britain has not produced a champion since James Hunt in 1976 but Nigel Mansell is favourite to bring the driver's title back to Britain.
After two near-misses in 1986 and 1987 Mansell's Williams-Judd proved no match for the powerful McLarens of Prost (FRA) and Ayrton Senna (BRA) in 1988.
But a move to Ferrari in 1989 will bring renewed hope of Mansell lifting the title for the first time.
Motor racing, however, extends beyond the world of high-powered McLarens', Williams' and Ferraris': Britain's Derek Bell and Belgium's Jacky Ickx have shown a domination of sports car racing in the last decade that Fangio, Lauda, Prost and co. would have been proud of in Formula One.
In the United States, A.J. Foyt and Al Unser are something of national heroes as a result of their exploits in the world of Chevvys and Thunderbirds.
But motor racing goes even deeper than that and today's Hill Climb champion, and Formula Ford champion, could well be tomorrow's Formula One world champion.
FORMULA ONE WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP
The first Formula One World Championship race took place at Silverstone on 13 May 1950 and was won by Italian Giuseppe Farina, who became the first World Champion four months later.
Seven races made up the first championship and that number has fluctuated over the years.
Sixteen races made up the 1986 championship.
Between 1950 and 1960 the Indianapolis 500 was included in the championship but it was rare for a European Grand Prix driver to compete in the race, and vice versa.
Because of its limited appeal among Grand Prix drivers, it has been ignored for some record purposes in the statistical section to be found at the end of this chapter.
The World Championships of 1952 and 1953 were run on Formula Two rules, but race results etc have been included for record purposes.
Note: Average speed is given for first driver only.
STIRLING MOSS
If one name was synonymous with motor racing in Britain in the 1950s, it was that of Stirling Moss.
He was to motor racing what Denis Compton was to cricket and Stanley Matthews was to football.
But, despite his popularity and wealth of talent, Moss never won coveted World Drivers' Championship and is, undoubtedly, the greatest driver never to have won the title.
Born at West Kensington in London in 1929, Moss started his racing career in Hill Climbs at the age of 17, before developing into one of the great Endurance and Formula One drivers of the 1950s.
He was just as at home behind the wheel of a Sports Car as he was in a Grand Prix car, and his passion for all branches of the sport possible hindered his quest for the world title.
His first Grand Prix was the 1951 Swiss when he was in a British HWM but he had to wait four years for his first success.
Moss's loyalty to British manufacturers like Cooper, Jaguar, Frazer-Nash and ERA certainly hindered his early progress as they could not provide cars good enough to compete with the European manufacturers.
He came close to joining the Italian giant Ferrari but did eventually join an overseas manufacturer in 1954, when he joined Ferrari's rivals, Maserati.
The great Fangio (Arg) was also in the Maserati team but they only had one race together as team-mates before Fangio moved on to Mercedes.
The pair of them teamed up again the following season when Moss also joined the German manufacturer.
Both men had cars capable of winning the world title but that honour went to the Argentinian, while Moss had to be content with the runner-up position although he did record his first Grand Prix victory at Aintree in 1955.
That year was also memorable for Moss because, with co-driver Denis Jenkinson, he became the first, and only, Briton to win the Mille Miglia classic.
When Mercedes pulled out of racing in 1956 Moss went back to Maserati and Fangio to Lancia.
The Argentinian beat the Englishman by a mere three points in that year's championship.
Fangio and Moss teamed up again at Maserati in 1957, but their renewed partnership was only brief as Moss soon moved to Vanwall. the pair of them, however, dominated the championship once more but the final championship read: 1st Fangio, 2nd Moss, for a third successive year.
With Fangio retiring after the 1958 French Grand Prix the way was surely open for Moss to win his first world title.
Although Moss won four rounds, he lost out to fellow Briton Mike Hawthorn only winning one championship race.
Moss was never to get that close to the title again and his career ended on Easter Monday 1962, after a high-speed crash at Goodwood.
Moss escaped with his life but the famous "Lucky No.7" car of his was not seen in a Formula One Grand Prix again although he did later return to saloon car racing.
He sill maintains contact with motor racing in Britain and the name of Stirling Moss still remains synonymous with the sport.
A SAD DAY AT HOCKENHEIM
Jim Clark's two sponsors, Lotus and Ford, both wanted him to drive on Sunday 7 April, 1968.
Lotus boss Colin Chapman wanted Clark to compete in the Deutschland Trophae Formula Two race at the Hockenheim circuit, set among the pine forests of Heidelberg, while Ford wanted him to drive their new 3-litre prototype in the BOAC 500-mile international sports car race at Brands Hatch.
The arguments over who he should drive for went on until the last minute when it was decided that Clark should make the fateful trip to Germany.
The race around the fast but treacherous circuit was scheduled for 20 laps and was the first of eight races to count towards the European Formula Two Championship.
Clark was visibly unhappy in his Lotus-Cosworth and, despite being the race favourite, was struggling in eighth place on the sixth lap when, coming out of a gentle right-hand curve, he lose control of the car.
It careered down the track for 500 yards before somersaulting three or four times and crashing broadside into a clump of tree before disintegrating "into 100 pieces" , as a trackside official described it.
The wreckage was strewn over an area of 150-yard radius, confirming the official's description.
Clark was rushed to the clinic at Heidelberg University but was dead on arrival as a result of a broken neck, skull fracture and multiple internal injuries.
Ironically, it was Clark's first competitive drive at Hockenheim, and it was the circuit's first fatality.
Hockenheim was a fast circuit but was regarded as one of the safest.
Colin Chapman, however, had his doubts and was convinced that if it had barriers around it, similar to those at Monaco, Clark would never have died.
What caused the accident remains a mystery, although a cut in on of the rear tyres was discovered over a week later, but according to Lotus is was impossible to be categoric as to the real cause.
The nearest driver to Clark capable of given an eye witness account was Robin Widdows (GB) in a McLaren-Ford, but he saw little, except the blur in the distance of Clark's vehicle leaving the track.
The accident happened out of sight of the public enclosures and 80,000 spectators rose to their feet in a stunned numbness when the tannoy announced that Clark was dead.
Clark's Lotus team-mate Graham Hill (GB) pulled our of the race which was eventually won by Frenchman Jean-Pierre Beltoise.
Jim Clark, the greatest driver produced by Britain, had survived many high speed crashes in the past — at Aintree, Brands Hatch and Monaco, but he could not survive the 275-kph (170-mph) crash on that sad day at Hockenheim in 1968.
BROOKLANDS
Brooklands has a legendary place in motor racing history, not only in Britain, but world-wide.
As the first purpose-built motor racing circuit in the world it was the forerunner of many of today's great circuits and must, therefore never be forgotten.
Opened in 1907, it was the idea of motoring enthusiast Hugh Fortesque Locke-King and he invested £150,000 of his own money in the circuit.
It was built to a design by Colonel H.C.L. Holden on part of Lord Northcliffe's estate near Weybridge in Surrey.
For more than 30 years Brooklands was the home of hundreds of races, the scene of many record attempts, and the testing ground for manufacturers who were restricted to the 20mph speed limit on Britain's roads at the time.
Three different circuits were used: The Outer Circuit (the full course) measured 4.45 km (2.77 miles); the Short Course took in everything except the Home Banking, and was 4.21 km (2.62 miles) long; and the Mountain Course used only the Home Banking and Finishing Straight and measured 1.88 km (1.17 miles).
A simulated road course, the Campbell Course, was added in 1937 and ran in an anti-clockwise direction.
Because it was the first purpose-built circuit, the designer had little knowledge of such matter and based his design on that of a horse race track.
Consequently it was virtually oval-shaped.
It bordered the railway line, 20 miles from London.
Part of the track which went over the river Wey was supported by a ferro-concrete bridge — revolutionary in its day.
The actual surface consisted of a flimsy 6-in (15-cm) layer of concrete, a far cry from the resilient surfaces that take today's high-speed cars.
Because of the hammering the great Bugattis and the like gave Brooklands during the summer months, extensive repairs had to be carried out each winter.
The most striking feature at Brooklands, the two steep banked bends, were known as the Byfleet Banking and the Members Banking, which reached a maximum height of nearly 9 m (29 ft).
such sever bends would never be allowed in the safety conscious world of Grand Prix racing today.
The first race at Brooklands was in July 1907 and the first British Grand Prix(then known as the RAC Grand Prix ) was held at Brooklands in 1926 and won by Robert Senechal and Louis Wagner in a Delage at an average speed of 115.22 kph (71.61 mph).
Motor cycling was also popular at Brooklands and the great John Cobb was synonymous with the circuit and his lap record of 230.80 kph (143.44 mph) in a 24-litre Napier-Railton stood at the time of the circuit's closure.
Apart from a brief period during the First World War, when the Royal Flying Corps had use of the area inside the circuit, Brooklands was used continuously from 1907 to the outbreak of the Second World War.
On that occasion the site was taken over by the Vickers-Armstrong aircraft factory but it was never suitably repaired and racing never returned to Brooklands.
The site was sold to Vickers for £300,000 in 1946 and thus was brought about the end of a motor racing legend.
JAMES HUNT'S YEAR
The 1976 World Championship was divided into two halves: that of Niki Lauda and James Hunt.
As the Austrian dominated the first eight races of the 16-race championship in defence of his world title, Hunt dominated the second half after Lauda's horrific accident at the Nurburgring in August.
Hunt was in his first season with McLaren when his talent influenced them to sign him as leader, after his former team, Hesketh, folded at the end of 1975.
The 29-year-old former public schoolboy and ex-junior Wimbledon tennis starlet was entrusted with the McLaren M23 and, after snatching pole position from the Ferrari of Niki Lauda in the first race of the season, the Brazilian Grand Prix at Interlagos, it looked like a promising start for the new team.
Lauda, however, went on to win the first race of the season as Hunt crashed out on lap 33.
The South African Grand Prix at Kyalami was also won by Lauda but Hunt came close to catching him at the end, losing by just over a second.
Hunt was put out of the new US Grand Prix(West) at Long Beach, following a shunt with Patric Depailler (Fra) as Lauda finished second to stretch his lead to 18 points.
Hunt overtook Lauda to win the Spanish Grand Prix at Jarama, the fourth of the championship, but then the season-long wrangling and arguing started when it was ruled that Hunt's car was 1.8 cm (0.7 in) too wide and he was stripped of his points, Lauda being promoted to first place.
Naturally an appeal was made by the McLaren team but the dispute was not resolved for many weeks.
Consequently Lauda's lead stretched to 27 points.
Ferrari, headed by Lauda, were first and second in Belgium while Hunt retired on lap 36.
Lauda added nine more points after leading from start to finish at Monaco while Hunt was again out of the scoring, and seemingly out of the championship.
The Austrian pulled away further with a third to Hunt's fifth in Sweden to stretch hi lead to a mammoth 47 points.
The turning point for Hunt came in the last race of the first half of the season when Lauda retired from the French Grand Prix with a rear mechanical fault and Hunt took full advantage by winning.
The day after the race, the appeals committee reinstated the Englishman as winner of the Spanish Grand Prix.
Suddenly Lauda's lead was cut to 26 points.
More trouble was to follow Hunt at the British Grand Prix at Brads when has was involved in a shunt at the first bend after Lauda and Clay Regazzoni (Swi) collided.
The race was restarted and Hunt took part after illegally receiving repairs to his car.
While Hunt went on to win the race from Lauda, he was disqualified two months later, with the maximum points going to the defending champion.
The German Grand Prix was next and Hunt scored another victory to pull himself to within 14 points of Lauda but the race was marred by the horrific accident to the Austrian who was badly burnt in his wrecked car.
With Lauda sidelined, the way was open for Hunt to close the gap even further.
He could only manage fourth at the Osterreichring but gained maximum points at Zandvoort two weeks later.
Only two points separated the two mend going into the Italian Grand Prix at Monza when, six weeks after his accident, Lauda was back behind the wheel and, amazingly, increased his lead in the championship with a fourth place after Hunt failed to finish.
Before the next race, the Canadian Grand Prix, it was announced that Hunt had been stripped of his points from the British Grand Prix , Hunt, and the McLaren team, were incensed by the decision and went out and won the Canadian and US Grands Prix (East) in successive weeks.
Lauda only picked up four points from the two races.
An so, with one race in the championship remaining, Lauda led by two points.
Mount Fuji, Japan, was the scene of the final act as Japan played host to its first World Championship Grand Prix.
Appalling weather conditions forced Lauda to withdraw after just two laps — a decision few, except Enzo Ferrari, criticized.
Hunt had to finish in the first three to win the title.
He led for most of the first 60 laps but was forced to make a tyre change.
He slipped to fifth with just four laps to go, but miraculously, he hauled himself third place and hung on to win the championship by just one point.
Hunt became the first Briton since Jackie Stewart in 1973 to win the title, but the real hero of the most dramatic of World Championships was Niki Lauda.
JACK BRABHAM
When 40-year-old Australian Jack Brabham won the World Championship in 1966, he became the first man to win the title in a car manufactured by himself and it reaped the rewards of a gamble he took five years earlier when he left Cooper to develop his own Grand Prix car.
John Arthur Brabham was the son of a Sydney greengrocer, born in 1926.
He had a love of cars at a very early age and after serving as an engineer in the Royal Australian Air Force during the war, he started racing midget cars in his home country, winning the Australian Midget Car Championship in the five year between 1947–51.
He then turned to road racing in a Cooper and continued his run of success.
He toured Britain in 1955 and competed in the British Grand Prix at Aintree but had to retire after 34 laps in his Cooper-Bristol that was just not up to the task of Formula One racing against the likes of Moss and Fangio's Mercedes.
Unperturbed by the experience, Brabham saw his future in England and returned with his wife in 1957 to set up home.
Naturally, he joined the Cooper Grand Prix team and he was to spearhead their revolutionary rear-engined attack on the World Championship.
Not only did he bring his delightful driving skill to the team but also his vast engineering knowledge and the two combined to make Cooper one of the leading forces in Grand Prix racing for several years.
Brabham's first Grand Prix success came in the 1959 Monaco Grand Prix, followed by another win in the British Grand Prix at Aintree.
This, plus a season of consistent driving gave Brabham the world title and Cooper the    Constructors' Championship.
They repeated the performance in 1960 when Brabham won five consecutive races in Holland, Belgium, France, England and Portugal.
He only collected four points in the 1961 championship and decided to leave Cooper at the end of the season to develop hi ow Grand Prix car.
The decision was bold, but Brabham was a shrewd businessman and he could adequately back his decision with his own engineering skills.
Fellow Australian Ron Tauranac joined him as chief designer and the first Brabham car was ready in 1962.
It made its debut at the German Grand Prix at the Nurburgring with Jack behind the wheel, but he was forced to retire after nine laps.
Two years later Dan Gurney (USA) provided the team with its first victory when he won the French Grand Prix with Brabham himself in third place.
Brabham eventually had his first success in his own car in the 1966 French Grand Prix, shortly before which he had been awarded the OBE for his services to the sport.
He went on to win the British, Dutch and German Grands Prix to clinch that season's championship by 14 points from John Surtees (GB).
Brabhams dominated the sport in 1967, with New Zealander Denny Hulme winning the world title and Brabham five points behind in second place.
Since then Nelson Piquet (Bra) has provided the team with further World Championships, in 1981 and 1983.
Brabham, the quiet, shy Australian, who was the first man from the Antipodes to break into Grand Prix racing, retired from driving in 1970 with 123 Formula One Grand Prix starts to his credit and 14 victories.
The Changing Face of the Nurburgring
The old Nurburgring was one of the most notorious and testing of racing circuits.
Built around the village of Nurburg, it provided work for some of Germany's unemployed in the 1920s and was finished in 1927.
Set among forest land in the Eifel area, its 14-mile lap certainly tested a driver's skill and concentration.
After Pescara, it is the second longest circuit to be used for a Formula One championship race.
More than 70 corners and curves provided enough hazards, but the steep artificial banking at Karussell and the hump at Flugplatz made the circuit even more hazardous.
Many of the hazards were approached 1 blind because of the acute undulations, thus making it one of the most severe circuits on the racing calendar.
The original circuit measured 17.563 miles (28.265 km) in length, but the south loop that went to the village of Mullenbach and back was rarely used and the main circuit (known as the north loop), which went to Adenau village and back measured 14.17 miles (22.81 km).
From is opening to the outbreak of the war the "Ring" staged every German Grand Prix.
It became the permanent home of the German race with the exception of 1959 when the race was staged at Avus, and 1970 when Hockenheim was used for the first time.
The pressure to close or rebuild the circuit increased rapidly following complaints from drivers about its safety standards.
The severe artificial banking was removed and in 1967 the lap was extended slightly and a chicane added near the start at Tiergarten in an attempt to slow down the circuit.
However, many felt this was not enough.
Early in 1976 Austrian Niki Lauda said that it was totally unsuitable because of the time it would take firefighters to reach some parts of the vast circuit.
Ironically, Lauda was involved in an accident on lap two of the 1976 race that nearly killed him.
Unlike Onofre Marimon (ARG), Peter Collins (GB), Carel Godin de Beaufort (HOL) and John Taylor (GB), who all died at the Nurburgring, Lauda was spared his life, but was badly scared.
This tragedy occurred in the last Grand Prix race on the old circuit and was won by James Hunt in a McLaren.
Something had to be done to tame this circuit, and it was…the "Ring" was brought down to size.
The 14-mile lap was reduced to a shadow of its former self at a mere 2.8 miles (4.51 km).
Part of the old circuit was retained, but the revamped circuit offered nothing like the excitement and challenge of its predecessor.
The Nurburgring returned to the Grand Prix Calendar in 1984 when Alain Prost won the European Grand Prix.
It was used for the German Grand Prix in 1985 but its return as a championship circuit was shortlived and it now plays second string to the Hockenheim.
The new "Ring" , however, still stages major races and a round the world sports car championship is held over the famous circuit to maintain the long association with one of motor racing's most forbidding and famous circuits.
JUAN MANUEL FANGIO
Motor racing, like other sports often poses the question: "Who was the greatest?" 
There are plenty of candidates: Italy's Tazio Nuvolari was certainly the outstanding driver before the war, and post-war candidates include Britain's Jim Clark and Jackie Stewart, and Austria's Niki Lauda.
But none of their records compare with that of the Argentinian Juan Manuel Fangio who won the world driver's title a record five times.
Even more remarkable, compared to the modern-day heroes, Fangio was aged 39 when the World Championship was introduced in 1950 and 46 when he won his fifth, and final, title in 1957.
Born at Balcarce, near Buenos Aires, in 1911 he was first introduced to the sport as a 17-year-old when he travelled as an accompanying mechanic in the long-distance races in his home country.
It was not until 1933 that he started driving.
Initially he used to race Model A Fords before later joining the Chevrolet team, after which he went on to win Argentina's top event, the Gran Premio Nacional.
He came to Europe in 1948 and returned again the following year when his familiar blue and yellow Maserati was a regular sight at Grand Prix on the continent.
While he was good enough to win races, quite often his car was not.
But, Alfa Romeo returned to racing for the first World Championship in 1950, he was invited to join their team and he finished second in the inaugural championship, having won the Monaco, Belgian and French Grands Prix.
His first world title came the following year when his Alfa enabled him to register three more wins and a six-point win over Ascari in the championship.
When Alfa pulled out of racing in 1952, Fangio returned to Maserati but a bad accident at Monza, in which he broke his neck, put him in plaster for five months.
The brave Argentinian, nicknamed "Cheuco" — meaning Bandy Legs — was back with a vengeance in 1953 and pushed his Maserati to second place in the championship.
In 1954, he joined Mercedes, who had made a welcome return to racing, and his second championship followed.
He was with them when he won the title again in 1955 and his hat-trick was completed a year later after joining the Ferrari.
While his Lancia-Ferrari D50 was a winning machine, Fangio spent an unhappy year with the Italian manufacturer and returned to Maserati for the 1957 season.
He won the championship for a    record fifth time and in winning the German Grand Prix at the Nurburgring he not only won his 24th, and last, World Championship Grand Prix, but he enjoyed one of the best races of his career.
The strong Ferrari team decided to run the entire race non-stop without pit stops for refuelling or tyre changes, while Maserati, and Fangio, decided to run on half fuel, and then refill.
He cleverly made use of the lowering fuel weight and bedding in of new tyres, to outwit his British challengers, Hawthorn and Collins.
The Argentinian trailed by 45 seconds just after the half-way stage as a result of his pit stop but then broke the lap record with each lap before snatching a last-grasp victory.
He lowered the lap record by a staggering 11 seconds.
Still with Maserati in 1958 and still world champion, he announced his retirement after the French Grand Prix.
He competed in 51 World Championship races and started in pole position in 29 of them, winning 24.
JACKIE STEWART
Jackie Stewart was easily recognizable on the starting grid, but because of the distinguishable Stewart tartan band across his helmet.
Scottish, and very proud of it, just as Scotland is proud of him, John Young Stewart was born near Dumbarton, Strathclyde in 1939 and went on to become the most dominant Formula One driver between 1969 and his retirement in 1973.
The son of a Jaguar dealer motoring ran through the family's veins.
Jackie's brother Jimmy, was the first to take up racing but he quit after an accident.
Despite pleas from his mother, Jackie was next to try his hand at the sport.
His first race was at Oulton Park in 1962 when he was behind the wheel of a Porsche.
One of the greatest partnerships in motor racing was formed in 1964 when Stewart and Ken Tyrell teamed up.
Stewart was signed up to race Tyrell's Formula Three Coopers and he won his first race at Snetterton.
Furthermore, he won virtually every Formula Three even he entered.
With Tyrell he also picked up valuable Formula Two experience and it was not long before Formula One manufacturers were after his signature.
Stewart joined BRM in 1965 where he replaced American riche Ginther as Graham Hill's new stablemate.
He finished sixth in his first Grand Prix, the South African, but enjoyed his first win later in the season when he won the Italian Grand Prix at Monza, and eventually finished the championship in third place.
In 1966 he won the opening round of the championship at Monte Carlo but, after a bad crash at Spa in the next race, he failed to win again that season, or the season after.
His fortune took a turn for the better in 1968, however, when he teamed up with Tyrell again who had entered the world of Formula One with the Matra MS10.
Stewart gave the car its first win at Zandvoort, and victories at the Nurburgring, by a staggering four minutes, and at Watkins Glen ensured him of second place in the championship to his former team-mate Hill.
The Matra-Ford proved even more reliable the following season, as car and driver swept the board with six wins which gave Stewart the first of his three world titles, winning by 26 points from Jacky Ickx (Bel).
Tyrell ran the March team in 1970 but the car was not good enough for a driver of Stewart's calibre so Tyrell decided to build and run one under his own name for Stewart.
In 1971 the glory days returned as Stewart won six of the eleven rounds of the championship on his way to winning his second title.
Early-season mechanical problems with his car in 1972 were too big a handicap, despite his late-season burst, for him to win his third title but another title came in 1973 when he won five races and surpassed the all-time records of Juan Manuel Fangio (Arg) and Jim Clark (GB).
Steward had announced he was retiring at the end of that season but his retirement happened earlier than anticipated.
He was scheduled to compete in his 100th, and last, Grand Prix at Watkins Glen but he pulled out of the race in respect for his team-mate Francois Cevert who was killed in practice.
Despite numerous offers to return to Grand Prix racing, including a staggering £1 million from the Brabham team in 1981, Stewart never returned to the sport.
But he has remained in contact with the motor racing as a broadcaster and interviewer.
When not attending a race meeting, Stewart can often be seen enjoying his favourite pastime, clay-pigeon shooting, a sport at which he gained international honours and came close to Olympic selection.
THE BRAZILIAN INVASION
Brazil is of course famous for its coffee and nuts.
In the sporting world she has produced very few truly outstanding champions.
But when she does produce a champion it is one of remarkable character and ability.
Amazingly, Brazil has excelled in the world of motor racing, producing not one, but two, but three world champions, all of whom have proved themselves to be great drivers.
In the early days of World Championship Grand Prix racing Brazil had to sit back and watcher her next-door neighbour Argentina take all the honours through Juan Manuel Fangio.
Indeed, it was not until 1956 that a Brazilian made any impact when Nano da Silva Ramos finished 5th in his Gordini in the Monaco Grand Prix.
It was 20 years after the formation of the World Championship, however, before Brazil could celebrate the winner of a Grand Prix when Emerson Fittipaldi won the 1970 US Grand Prix in a Lotus.
Fittipaldi was two months short of his 24th birthday at the time.
Two years later, in 1972, he became the youngest world champion.
After finishing second to Jackie Stewart the following year he was crowned "king" for a second time twelve months later.
Between 1970 and 1975 he won 14 Grands Prix.
He tried to develop his own Formula One team in 1976 but gave that up in 1980 when near to financial disaster.
Now living in Miami Beach, he is back behind the wheel and enjoying life in Indy Car racing in the United States.
The next of the great Brazilians, Nelson Piquet, made an unimpressive start in 1978.
He had four drives, with three different manufacturers, and his best result was 11th in the Canadian Grand Prix.
But that was the start of a great career for the man who changed his name from Souto Maior to Piquet so his parents wouldn't know he was kart racing back home in Brazil.
After getting a regular drive in the Brabham team, Piquet grew in confidence and ability and won his first race at Long Beach in 1980.
He was runner-up to Alan Jones in that year's championship but the following year pipped Carlos Reutemann by one point for the title.
Champion for a second time in 1983, he teamed up with Nigel Mansell at Williams in 1986 and a year later was champion for the third time.
In 1988 he moved again, this time to Lotus, but he had to be content with watching the McLaren duo of Alain Prost and fellow Brazilian Ayrton Senna in front of him for most of the season.
If Piquet retires, then Senna is his obvious successor.
Like Piquet he changed his name (from Senna da Silva to Senna) so his family wouldn't know of his racing exploits.
Like Piquet he is an outstanding talent with the desire and ability to win.
A former British Formula Three champion, he won a record nine races in succession in 1983.
He entered Formula One with the Toleman team in 1984 and finished joint 9th in the World Championship.
He moved to Lotus the following season and enjoyed his first win at Estoril.
Fourth in the World Championship in 1985 and 1986, he improved to third 1987.
In 1988 he emulated Fittipaldi and Piquet by lifting the world crown.
With three world champions to her credit, Brazil is already nurturing more talent to add to that number and the likes of Mauricio Gugelmin are ready to step into Piquet's and Senna's shoes.
WORLD SPORTS CAR CHAMPIONSHIP
Endurance racing has remained one of the most popular forms of motor racing and, apart from the Formula One World Championship, the Sports Car World Championship is the longest surviving World Championship even, although it has appeared under different guises since first seen in 1953.
It was known as the Sports Car World Championship from 1953–61 and the title went to the leading manufacturer.
A 3-litre capacity limit was introduced in 1958.
The championship ended in 1961 and the F.I.A.
introduced a championship for Grand Touring (GT) cars and strictly speaking the Sports World Car World Championship ceased, although the organizers of the Targa Florio, Le Mans, Nurburgring and Sebring races offered the Challenge Mondiale de Vitesse for Prototype cars.
The Daytona race became part of the "Championship" in 1965 and in 1967 a total of eight races made up the Prototype competition.
From 1968 the F.I.A.
introduced a new World Sports Car Manufactures' Championship for both Competition Sports Cars (Group 4) and Prototypes (Group 6).
This championship, like all other before it, was for manufacturers only, and not for drivers.
With the distinction between Competition Sports Cars and Prototypes disappearing, a new championship was introduced in 1972 which was called the World Championship for Makes for Prototype Sports Cars (Group 5) and GT Cars (Group 4).
From 1976 the championship was open to Group 5 cars only.
In 1981, however, sports car drivers had a World Championship for the first time, when the championship was again renamed the World Endurance Championship and from 1982 the championship was for the new Group C cars.
The championship renamed yet again in 1986 when it became The Sports-Prototype World Championship, for both drivers and teams.
JIM CLARK
Today, nearly 20 years after his death, Jim Clark is still remembered, and generally regarded as the greatest driver of the post-war era.
Born in Fife, Scotland in 1936, Clark was the son of a wealthy sheep farmer and gave up his education at the age of 16 to work on the farm.
He used to have a go at driving his father's Austin Seven around the farm at an early age, and later he became seriously interested in motor racing — not least because Mike Hawthorn winning the Leinster Trophy in 1951 had made a deep impression.
He decided to try his hand in racing and in June 1956 the skills of Jim Clark were first seen at Crimond Airfield, near Aberdeen, when he made his racing debut in a DKW Saloon.
It was apparent from that day that he had a natural talent that was waiting to be developed.
He first met Colin Chapman, boss of Lotus cars, at Brands Hatch in 1958 who was impressed with the youngster's driving.
It was not until two years later, however, that Clark accepted Chapman's offer to join the team.
Both Clark and his mentor developed one of those partnerships whose memory will last forever.
Whose could even forget the sight of Clark steering the famous green Lotus to the Grand Prix success time and time again.
Clark made his Formula One debut for Lotus in the 1960 Dutch Grand Prix with team-mate John Surtees was contracted to a motor cycle race.
Two years later Clark had the first of his 25 Grand Prix wins at Spa and ended up runner-up in the World Championship to Graham Hill.
In 1963, however, Clark was champion for the first time, after winning a record seven rounds, and at 27 he became the youngest-ever world champion.
Two years later Clark was champion again after winning another six rounds of the championship and he also, in 1965, became the first Briton to win the coveted Indianapolis 500 title.
Motor racing was deprived of the rare talent of Jim Clark in April 1968 when he lost his life at Hockenheim.
The motor racing world was stunned because, in a sport that flirts with death, there were many drivers who thought that if it could happen to Clark, it could happen to any of them.
Jim Clark, a bachelor, spent his entire Formula One career at Lotus.
He took part in 72 Grands Prix, was on pole position 33 times and won 25 races — a record at the time.
He was not a loser, as his record of just one second placing shows.
Had it not been for the tragic accident at Hockenheim, Jim Clark's record would surely have been unsurpassable.
THE LE MANS DISASTER
The 1955 Le Mans was to be the fastest ever and the two Mercedes of Stirling Moss (GB) and Juan Manuel Fangio (Arg) were expected to dominate the race.
But it was the Mercedes driven by Pierre Levagh, that was the centre of attraction — for the wrong reasons.
At 4.00 p.m. on Saturday 11 June the drivers engaged in their traditional sprint start to their cars for the 23rd Le Mans, scheduled to cover more than 4000 mkm (2500 miles).
Less than two and a half hours later, Le Mans was to be the scene of the worst disaster in motor racing history.
On the 42nd lap Levagh came up the straight between the grandstand and the pits in his silver Mercedes at about 240 kph (150 mph) and was being followed by Fangio.
In front of Levagh was the Austin Healey of Lance Macklin (GB), travelling at about 210 kph (130 mph).
Levagh put his had up to indicate to Fangio to that he was about to overtake; Macklin then braked, Levagh caught Macklin's car and somersaulted over the safety barrier into the crowd.
The Mercedes burst into flames and broke up with the burning wreckage being thrown among the spectators.
Levagh was killed, as were numerous fans.
The full extent of the tragedy was impossible to asses at first, but it soon became apparent that the number who were killed instantly was in excess of 70.
The race went on, and the other two Mercedes cars stayed in the race.
The extent of the disaster was kept from the remaining drivers, particularly Levagh's team-mates Moss and Fangio but at two o'clock in the morning, orders were received by the Mercedes team-manager Alfred Neubauer, direct from the German factory, to pull all their cars out of the race.
At that point the full impact of the devastation hit the two favoured drivers.
With the Mercedes contingent out of the race, it paved the way for Mike Hawthorn (GB) and Ivor Bueb (GB) to go on and win in their Jaguar.
Many though the race should have stopped immediately, while others believed the Mercedes policy to keep racing was wrong.
But both decisions were at the request of the race organizers who felt any cancellation or withdrawal may have resulted in a mass exodus of spectators from the circuit which would have hindered rescue operations.
At dawn the death toll rose still further in the worst disaster since 1952, when 13 people were killed after a car left the track at Weyberg, Rhineland, Germany.
The Le Mans officials were blameless as their safety measures were found to be more than adequate, and the speed at which the injured were taken to hospital was also exemplary.
The tragedy did, naturally, have its consequences, as many races were cancelled throughout Europe that year and the sport was banned completely in Spain, Switzerland and Mexico.
It was even banned in France until such time as the rules were revised.
The final toll was 83 dead and more than 100 injured, many seriously, but Le Mans still went ahead the following year — with the memory of 1955 still very fresh in everybody's mind.
THE BUGATTI STORY
In the inter-war years Bugatti was the biggest name in motor racing.
The famous horseshoe-shaped radiator was seen taking the chequered flag at Le Mans, Brooklands and Silverstone.
In fact, at any circuit where racing took place, there would be a powerful presence of Bugattis.
Founder Ettore Bugatti was born in Milan in 1881.
He built his first car by the time he was 18. in 1909 he took over the Molsheim factory near Strasbourg and set about developing the greatest racing car in the world.
He wanted to build a car capable of winning more races than any other.
The First World War curtailed his ambitions but after the hostilities his cars were at their peak and invincible.
His ambitions were fulfilled as he rightly claimed that his cars won more races than any other model.
Simple machine tools accounted for the basic design of his cars.
But Bugatti was an innovator and it was his work at suspension development that gave his cars the edge over his rivals.
Bugatti was one of the first manufacturers to adopt cable-operated front wheel brakes.
His early cars were the smaller Brescia Bugattis which had pear-shaped radiator, but he soon developed the horseshoe-shaped radiator which became the Bugatti trademark.
The exceptional skills of Ettore Bugatti saw him develop a four-wheel drive car, the Type 53, for hill climbing in 1932.
His Type 28 used a straight eight-cylinder engine — another "first" for Ettore — but the crème de la crème was still to come, and when he introduced his Type 35 he showed the world the finest racing vehicle of its day.
A two-seater with a classic, pointed tail, the Type 35 was as good-looking as it was fast.
The eight-cylinder engine came in either 2- or 2.3-litre size, and could be either supercharged or non-supercharged.
The Type 35 was credited with more than 2,000 competitive victories.
Some of the great names of motor racing were seen behind the wheel of a Bugatti, one being Malcolm Campbell, who finished second in the inaugural British Grand Prix in 1926 (surprisingly, that was the best finish by a Bugatti in the race).
Other such as Louis Chiron, Early Howe, Philippe Etancelin and Jean-Pierre Wimille all steered one of other of the great cars to victory.
They showed their staying power in the long-distance races and won the Targa Florio five year in succession in 1925 to 1929.
And in 1937, just as their "reign" was coming to an end the Bugatti claimed one of racing's greatest prizes by winning Le Mans with Wimille and Robert Benoist in the driving seat.
Wimille (with Pierre Veyron) was to repeat the feat two year later.
Ettore Bugatti lost his love of racing after the death of his son Jean in an accident near the family factory.
The factory was confiscated as enemy property after the war and in 1947 Ettore Bugatti died.
Hispano Suiza took over the factory and continued producing cars until the last Bugatti appeared on a race track in 1956.
The name remains a legend and mention Bugatti still conjures up moments of sheer magic in those inter-war years on the racing circuits.
Their cars still compete in historic events.
TAZIO NUVOLARI
Standing a little over five feet tall, Tazio Nuvolari became the greatest driver of his era.
Born at Casteldario in 1892 the "Flying Mantuan" , as he was known, started racing motorcycles in 1923.
He was given the chance to show his skills on four wheels when Alfa Romeo gave him a trial, but he crashed one of their cars at Monza and was badly injured.
Despite these injuries, six days later, over the same circuit, he won the Grand Prix des Nations motorcycle race.
Nuvolari dovetails his two and four-wheel careers and, in 1927, won the Rome Grand Prix in a Bugatti.
He gave up motorcycling in 1929 when his love of cars got the better of him.
Italians were now coming to the fore in car racing thanks to Alfa, and Nuvolari joined the team as the man to spearhead their attack on the German manufacturers.
A driver with great skill and courage which belied his frail-looking body, Nuvolari stayed with Alfa until midway through 1933.
He left because he didn't like the team discipline and politics and he didn't feel that their cars were competitive enough.
After leaving Alfa, he formed his own small team with Baconin Borzacchini racing Maseratis, Alfas and Bugattis.
In 1934 he crashed at Allessandria, breaking his leg.
Four weeks later at Avus he was back behind the controls, even through he hobbled to his car on crutches and had to be lifted into the cockpit and the pedals had to be modified because he could use only one foot.
In 1935 Nuvolari received a telegram from Mussolini ordering him to rejoin Enzo Ferrari's Alfa team.
Although their cars were not as good as the Germans' he drove brilliantly and beat the Mercedes and Auto Unions at the Nurburgring in 1935 to win the German Grand Prix.
Following Alfa's declining interest in Grand Prix racing Nuvolari moved to Auto Union during the 1938 season and gave them victories in the Italian and British Grands Prix.
He carried on racing after the war and in 1946, at the age of 54, won the Albi Grand Prix.
However, with his health failing, he had his last drive in the French Grand Prix two years later when he shared a Maserati with Luigi Villoresi.
Between 1927 and 1947 Nuvolari won more races than any other man.
He won all the leading Grands Prix; twice won the Millie Miglia, twice the Targa Florio, won the Tourist Trophy twice and, in 1933, won Le Mans.
Nuvolari died on 11 August 1953.
He had expected to lose his life on the track, but he passed away peacefully in his bed.
His last words were: "Bury me in my uniform" , and as he lay in the chapel of rest he was wearing his familiar pullover, yellow shirt and blue crash helmet.
Many regarded Tazio Nuvolari as "the greatest" and one man who had not doubts about that claim was Enzo Ferrari.
And if Ferrari said he was "the greatest, then" the greatest"he was…
LE MANS
Any mention of Sports Car racing immediately brings to mind the Le Mans 24-Hour race.
While many Le Mans results have been included in the foregoing pages, the race holds such a special place in motor racing history that it deserves inclusion in its own right.
The Le Mans Grand Prix d'Endurance, to give it its full and correct name, is not only one of the most famous motor races in the world, but also an institution in France.
The first Le Mans was held in 26/27 May 1923 and won by Andre Lagache and Rene Leonard in their 3-litre Chenard & Walcker.
All subsequent races have been held in June with the exception of 1956 (July) and 1968 (September).
Because 24 hours is a long time for spectators to stand and watch a race, many attractions were added to the occasion to provide a gala atmosphere, including the famous fun fair.
One feature of Le Mans was the famous race across the track by drivers to their unstarted cars.
Sadly, that great sight disappeared in 1970, when the cars lined up in front of the pits at the commencement of the race.
The original Le Mans circuit measured 17.26 km (10.73 miles) which was reduced to 16.34 km (10.15 miles) and in 1932 it was shortened considerably to 13.64 km (8.48 miles).
All subsequent races have been held over that distance with minor fluctuations.
The Le Mans race has been a prominent part of the World Sports Car Championship since its inauguration in 1953 and formed a round in the championship every year with the exception of 1956 and 1975–79.
For results of races in the championship see pages 101–120.
European Formula Two Championship
Formula Two was introduced in 1947 to enable young drivers, who could not get into Formula One teams, to compete internationally.
The F.I.A.
introduced a new Formula Two in 1967 and that same season saw the birth of the European Formula Two Championships with the first meeting at Snetterton on 24 March when the late Jochen Rindt (Austria) won the Guards Trophy over 174.5km (108) miles.
The championships ended in 1984 and were replaced by the new Formula 3000 Championship.
ENZO FERRARI
Italian Enzo Ferrari represented the biggest name in motor racing, and the Ferrari team can boast the most loyal following among all the manufacturers.
Ferrari himself was born at Modena in 1898.
When ambitions to become an opera singer and then a sports writer failed, he turned to his third interest — car racing.
He started racing for a small local manufacturer.
Then he joined the Alfa Romeo team in 1920 and finished the second in that year's Targa Florio.
While his career as a driver was moderately successful, he was never outstanding.
He then took his engineering skills into the Alfa factory where he soon discovered he enjoyed the organizing side of the sport more than racing.
He also had the responsibility of recruiting top men for the Alfa team and one of his biggest recruits was not a driver, but a top designer Vittorio Jano from Fiat.
Between them they turned Alfa Romeo into the biggest name in motor racing in the 1920s.
When Alfa pulled out of racing in 1929, Ferrari took over the racing division and moved his headquarters to his home town.
There he produced cars under the Scuderia (Team) Ferrari banner but these were basically Alfa designed cars.
The first true Ferrari was seen at Piacenza in 1947 and by the time the World Championship was introduced in 1950, Ferraris were soon gaining a reputation for being a reliable car.
They competed in their first World Championship race at Monaco but had to wait until Froilan Gonzalez (Arg) triumphed in the British Grand Prix at Silverstone a year later for their first World Championship success.
Alberto Ascari (Ita) and Gonzalez finished second and third in the 1951 World Championship but a year later Ascari won the title as Ferrari team-mates Farina (Ita), Taruffi (Ita) and Fischer (Swi) occupied second, third and fourth places.
Since then the Ferrari car has competed in over 400 World Championship Grand Prix races, and has registered nearly 100 victories.
But Ferrari has also produced card to win Le Mans, the Mille Miglia and many other major races, as well as to dominate the Formula One scene.
While Enzo Ferrari always had the ability to attract the best    drivers in the world, including the one he regarded as the best of all — the legendary Italian Tazio Nuvolari — the one man he never managed to get was Britain's Stirling Moss.
Had Moss joined the great Italian team, he could well have won the elusive World Championship.
Ferrari died in 1988 at the age of 90.
One of his final acts was to take Britain's Nigel Mansell from Williams.
Enzo Ferrari may no longer be with us but the name and legend will live on.
Hopefully Mansell will put the most famous name in racing back at the top of Formula One Grand Prix racing.
FORMULA 3000
A decision was taken in 1984 by F.I.S.A. at Pau to create Formula 3000 as a replacement for Formula Two.
The first European Formula 3000 Championship was staged in 1985 and changed its name to the F.I.A.
Formula 3000 International Championship in 1986.
EUROPEAN FORMULA THREE CHAMPIONSHIP
Following the success of the European Formula Two Championship the Formula Three Championship was started in 1975 under its initial banner of the F.I.A.
Championship.
Like its Formula Two counterpart it was removed from the international calendar at the end of 1984.
Colin Chapman — "The Lotus Eater" 
Genius, innovator, hard worker and self-made man were all accurate descriptions of Anthony Colin Bruce Chapman who died suddenly at the age of 54 at his Norfolk home in December 1982.
Fortunately, Colin Chapman, the link between the motoring enthusiast and the glamour of Grand Prix racing, has left a legacy in his famous Lotus name.
Chapman studied engineering at London University just after the war.
During his time at college he started modifying Austin Sevens and on 1 January 1952 his famous Lotus Engineering Company was registered, thanks to a loan of £25 from Hazel Williams, who later became his wife.
The company's first headquarters were at Hornsey, north London.
The first of more than 100 different models to have since borne the Lotus name, was based on the plywood body on an Austin Seven chassis.
These became not only very popular with enthusiasts but successful in 750 cc club events.
It was apparent that a genius had been born.
Foreseeing a market with the DIY enthusiast, Chapman produced his famous Lotus in kit form.
these and all his other cars became very popular, but Chapman had his heart set on entering the world of Formula One racing.
The first Lotus Grand Prix car, produced in 1958, was the Lotus 12, designed by Frank Costin, formerly of Vanwall.
Not surprisingly, the 12 looked like a Vanwall and was powered by a Coventry-Climax engine.
The car made its debut at that year's Monaco Grand Prix with Cliff    Allison (GB) and Graham Hill (GB) behind the wheel of the two entered cars.
Hill lasted 70 laps while Allison went on to finish sixth.
The first Grand Prix success for Lotus was not, ironically, for the Lotus team, but was by Stirling Moss (GB) in a privately entered rear-engined Lotus 18 in the 1960 Monaco Grand Prix, when he gave a superb display to beat New Zealander Bruce McLaren.
Jim Clark and Chapman teamed up in 1960 and one of the best relationships in Formula One Grand Prix racing soon developed.
Clark, undoubtedly the best driver of his era, lifted the world title in the revolutionary Lotus 25, with its Monocoque construction, in 1963 and 1965.
But their partnership ended one sad day in 1968, when Clark was inexplicably killed in a Formula Two race at Hockenheim.
Graham Hill had already joined the Lotus team a year earlier and he helped lift the gloom by winning the world title in 1968.
But tragedy struck again in 1970 when Jochen Rindt, Chapman's third world champion, was killed at Monza.
He was that season's posthumous world champion.
Emerson Fittipaldi was the next Lotus world champion and, just as it seemed the midas touch was deserting Chapman, American Mario Andretti lifted the 1978 title in the Lotus 78/79, with team-mate Ronnie Peterson (Swe) second.
There have been no Lotus world champions since then but Ayrton Senna (Bra) is hoping to join the long list of past champions.
But, whether he does emerge as another champion or not, the name of Lotus will never be forgotten in the world of motoring and motor racing.
BRITISH FORMULA THREE CHAMPIONSHIP
Formula Three racing has been popular in Great Britain since the early 1950s, when Formula Three cars were powered by 500 cc motor cycle engines.
Various championships have been staged in Britain over the years, each with individual sponsors, and quite often with two or more championships running concurrently.
but it was not until the introduction of the Vandervell British Formula Three Championship in 1979 that the Championship, as we know it today, was born.
NIKI LAUDA
Niki Lauda displayed courage beyond all recognition in 1976 when, six weeks after being given the Last Rites, he was back behind the wheel of his Ferrari picking up points in the Italian Grand Prix at Monza.
That was after his horrific accident at the Nurburgring on 1 August, when has was well clear in the World Championship and on his way to his second successive title.
However, disaster struck at the German Circuit and Lauda was pulled from his blazing car with multiple burns.
He was scarred for life, but the accident had done nothing to dampen his competition nature and just six weeks later he was finishing fourth at Monza.
The accident had allowed Britain's James Hunt to close the gap in the championship, which he went on to win by just one point form Lauda.
Niklaus Andreas Lauda was born the son of a Viennese paper mill owner on 22 February 1949.
He started racing in his home country in 1968 in a Mini Cooper.
Three years later he had his first Formula One drive in a March 711 at the Austrian Grand Prix, just six years after watching his first Grand Prix .
He was the John Player Formula Two champion in 1972 and then joined the BRM Formula One team the following season as the number three driver to Jean-Pierre Beltoise (Fra) and Clay Regazzoni (Swi).
Despite having a unsuitable car at BRM, Lauda gave some superb performances which attracted the eye of Enzo Ferrari.
It was after his move to the Italian manufacturer in 1974 that he enjoyed his first Grand Prix victory, at Jarama, in the Ferrari 312.
Lauda and Ferrari were supreme in 1975 and Lauda's five wins, including three in succession, were enough to take him on to his first world title, a title he would surely have retained had it not been for his accident at the Nurburgring.
But his second title in three years came in 1977 when, after an intensely close battle in the first half of the season with South African Jody Scheckter and American Mario Andretti, Lauda pulled clear to win the title with 17 points to spare.
After a move to Brabham in 1978, Lauda made the shock announcement during practice for the following year's Canadian Grand Prix that he was retiring to concentrate on building up Lauda-Air, his own airline company.
The retirement lasted two year, until McLaren tempted him back to the sport in 1982 and his old skills were soon apparent at Brands Hatch and Watkins Glen, where he returned to winning ways.
He gradually built himself up to a third championship in 1984, when he emerged champion by just half a point from his McLaren team-mate Alain Prost in one of the sport's closest battles.
A second retirement followed in 1985 and it looks as though Lauda is going to stick to his word this time.
If he does make another comeback though, it would not be surprising if he wins a fourth title because, if he can get back behind a wheel six weeks after being so close to death, there is no knowing what the courageous Austrian can do.
ALAIN PROST
After finishing second in the World Championship in 1983 and 1984, Alain Prost lose the "nearly man" tag in 1985 as he became the first Frenchman to win the title.
The likeable Frenchman, born in St. Chamond in 1955, could just as easily have established himself as a professional soccer player.
However, he first gained recognition behind the wheel of a car in his native country in 1976, when he swept the board in the Formula Renault Championship, winning 12 of the 13 rounds.
He won the European Formula Renault Championship the following year and then switched to Formula Three in 1978.
After lifting the European Formula Three crown in 1979, he was offered a position alongside John Watson in the McLaren Formula One team for 1980 and he picked up a point on his debut in the Argentine Grand Prix.
Prost joined the Renault team in 1981 as a replacement for Jean-Pierre Jabouille and had his first success in the rain-interrupted French Grand Prix at Dijon.
He had two other wins that year, at Zandvoort and Monza, but his car let him down on other occasions when his excellent driving had put him in a race-winning situation.
Still with Renault in 1982 he won the opening two rounds in Argentina and Brazil, after the disqualification of Piquet and Rosberg, but, sadly, they turned out to be his only successes.
However, it looked as though the talents of Prost were to be rewarded in 1983 when he went into the final race of the season at Kyalami with four wins to his credit and a two-point lead over Nelson Piquet.
Prost went out of the race on lap 36 and had to watch agonizingly as Piquet finished third to overhaul him and take the title by two points.
Prost lost the championship by an even smaller margin the following year when Niki Lauda, his new team-mate at McLaren, pipped him by a mere half a point despite the Frenchman winning seven rounds.
But it all cam good for Prost in 1985 when he won five championship races to win the title comfortably from Michele Alboreto (Ita).
Just as it looked as though he was going to be "bridesmaid" again in 1986m he emerged from a tense season as champion for a third time, but it was not resolved until the very last race of the season once more.
The final round of the championship was the Australian Grand Prix at Adelaide and Prost won the race from Nelson Piquet (Bra) after the championship leader, Nigel Mansell (GB), spectacularly went out of the race on lap 63.
Prost did to Mansell what Piquet had done to him in 1983, and in winning the title he became the first man since Jack Brabham (Aus) in 1960 to defend the title successfully and one of only four men to win it in successive years, joining two other greats, Alberto Ascari (Ita) and Juan Manuel Fangio (Arg).
He became close to a third title in 1968 but succumbed to his McLaren team-mate Ayrton Senna.
RACING IN AMERICA
Top auto racing in the United States falls under the control of three main bodies: The Sports Car Club of America (SCAA) founded 1944, the National Association of Stock Car Auto Racing (NASCAR) founded 1947, and Championship Auto Racing Team (CART), founded 1978.
The SCAA organize several season-long championships, the best known being the Trans-Am series.
Between 1966–1986 the Can-Am series was the most dominant racing even in North America but the SCAA dropped the series in 1986.
CART racing is responsible for a 15-race competition each year, and the most famous CART race is the Indianapolis 500 at the end of May each year.
NASCAR organize several different competitions annually, but their leading competition is the Winston Cup, a 29-race series held between February-November.
The most famous Winston Cup race is the Daytona 500.
CART (Championship Auto Racing Teams Inc.) was founded in 1978 by Roger Penske and "Pat" Patrick who broke away from the United States Auto Club (USAC) to form their own series of races.
CART ran its first race for Indy Cars on 11 March 1979 when Gordon Johncock won the 150-mile event at Phoenix International Raceway.
Indy Car racing has been in existence since 1909.
Between 1909–55 the season-long championship was known as the AAA National Championship.
It then became the USAC National Championship and since 1979, following the formation of CART, the CART National Championship.
The rift between CART and USAC widened when the latter refused CART racing teams entry to the 1979 Indianapolis 500, but after a court ruling they were reinstated.
CART and USAC were re-united early in 1980 and created the Championship Racing League (CRL).
Following further dispute all hopes of unity ended after five races and CART took control of the remainder of the series.
Since then CART has been totally autonomous and has gone from strength to strength, developing a multi-million dollar organization.
Since 1980 the series has been sponsored by PPG Industries and is know as the PPG Indy Car World Series.
Indy Cars are Formula One-type cars with engine capacities of up to 3430 cc turbocharged and 5878 cc non-turbocharged.
INDIANAPOLIS 500
The Indianapolis 500 is the culmination of a day-long carnival at the Indianapolis Raceway, Indiana as part of the Memorial Day celebrations at the end of May each year.
Crowds in excess of a quarter of a million flock to the raceway from all parts of America to share in the atmosphere.
The first 500-mile race over 200 laps of the 2.5-mile oval-shaped raceway was on 30 May 1911 and won by Ray Harroun in a Marmon Wasp.
Between 1950–60 the race was included in the World Drivers' Championship, and full results for those years can be found in the Grand Prix section, pages 12–25.
NASCAR
The National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing, Inc.
(NASCAR) was the brainchild of Virginian Bill France who formed the association in a Daytona hotel room in 1947.
The first race sanctioned by NASCAR was over the Daytona Beach course on 15 February 1948.
Early races were either over dirt tracks or beach circuits.
Today they are run over enclosed circuits and NASCAR races are now among the most popular in the United States.
The Winston Cup series was started in 1949 and was known as the Grand National series.
It became the Winston Cup in 1970 following sponsorship by the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
Stock Car racing in the United States is not for"bangers' as in the United Kingdom, but is for high-powered production cars like Ford Thunderbirds and Chevrolet Monte Carlos.
CAN-AM
The Canadian-American Challenge Cup series of international road races in the United States and Canada was introduced in 1966 in an attempt to bring the excitement of Grand Prix racing to the North American road circuits that had sprung up.
It evolved from the United States Road Racing Championship.
The first Can-Am race was the Player's Quebec Race at Mont Tremblant, St. Jovite on 11 September 1966 and was won by John Surtees in a Lola.
After a decline in interest in the mid-1970s the series was suspended in 1975 while a new formula was developed.
It was revived in 1977 but the SCAA suspended the series after the 1986 season.
The leading positions in the championships between 1966–86 were as follows:
TRANS-AM SERIES
Organized by the Sports Car Club of America (SCAA) the Trans-Am Series started in 1966 as the SCAA Trans-American Sedan Championship.
It is a championship for high-performance mass-produced cars which are sold in the United States.
Trans-Am races are basically "sprint" events, with most distances around 100 miles.
The first Trans-Am race was on 25 March 1966 and was won by ex-formula one world champion Jochen Rindt (AUT).
MISCELLANEOUS
The Early Years
The Americans and French both lay claim to staging the first automobile race.
An Oshkosh steamer won a 232 km (201 miles) race from Green Bay to Madison, Wisconsin in 1878 but the French claim the first real race for automobiles was the 31 km (19.3 miles) race from Saint-James, Paris, along the Seine, to Neuilly in 1887.
The race was organized by M. Fossier, editor of the French cycling magazine La Velocipede and won by Count Jules Felix Philippe Albert de Dion de Malfiance in hi De Dion quadricycle.
That latter race was to be the forerunner of the great Paris races that started seven years later when continental manufacturers would use the races to show off their vehicles.
The French capital was used as the starting point for all the races and the first, from Paris to Rouen, was organized by the Paris newspaper Le Petit Journal in 1894 with a £200 prize on offer.
The last Paris race was scheduled to go to Madrid but, by order of the government, it was halted at Bordeaux because of the high number of accidents involving pedestrians.
Racing on open roads was subsequently banned and the great Paris races came to an end.
The following are the results of some of the major"Paris Races' between 1894–1903.
GORDON BENNETT RACES
After spending two years in Paris trying to establish a French edition of his newspaper, New York Herald owner James Gordon Bennett, as a result of watching the increasing popularity of motor racing, put up a magnificent trophy to be contested annually by national"teams' in an effort to help promote the motor industry.
The trophy became known as the Gordon Bennett Cup, although he preferred to call it the Coupe Internationale.
The first race was from Paris to Lyons in 1900 and it remained an open road race until 1903 when it was held over the Athy circuit in Ireland.
Politics crept into the sport in 1905 and Bennett withdrew his sponsorship, turning his attention to flying instead.
The French Grand Prix was born in 1906, but, although soon forgotten, the Gordon Bennett Cup was the foundation on which current Grand Prix racing was built.
PRE-WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP GRAND PRIX RACING
Grand Prix racing existed long before the formation of the World Championship in 1950, and goes back to 1906 when the first French Grand Prix was run.
The following are results of the major Grand Prix races prior to 1950.
MILLE MIGLIA
In the Targa Florio and Mille Miglia, Italy was fortunate to stage two of the world's great endurance races.
The Targa Florio started in 1906 but in 1923 the French introduced the Le Mans 24-Hour race which soon gained a reputation for being the world's premier long-distance event.
In an effort to restore some pride, and also to help pull their motor industry out of its depression, the Italians introduced the Mille Miglia.
The idea was conceived by members of the Brescia Automobile Club and received the full blessing from Italian leader Mussolini.
The race was called the Mille Miglia because the distance of approximately 1000 miles was over the old Roman Mile.
The first race was in 1927 and took in a circuit that stated in Brescia, in the north of Italy, and weaved its way down to Rome and then back to Brescia.
The Italian car industry received its much needed boost in the first race when Messrs Monoia and Morandi beat off 76 other challengers to win in an Italian-made OM, who filled the first three places.
The cars used to set off at one-minute intervals, originally starting at 9.00 p.m. on a Saturday but that was changed in 1949 to midnight,.
At the same time, cars were numbered in accordance with the time they set off so the thousands of spectators that lined the route could get some indication who was leading.
A record 743 cars took part in 1950 which meant the last car away left Brescia about 12 hours after the first!
While the race covered approximately 1000 miles, the route varied over the years but maintained Brescia as its base.
Following an accident in the 1938 race, however, the Mille Miglia was banned in Italy the following year and a race purporting to be the Mille Miglia was held between Tobruk and Tripoli in north Africa and won by Ercole Boratto (Ita), a former chauffeur of Mussolini.
The race returned for on year in 1940 and was held over nine laps of a 100-mile circuit that took in Brescia-Cremona-Brescia and, while it was generally known as the Brescia Grand Prix, it still was accorded Mille Miglia status, unlike the 1939 event.
After the war it returned to its original Brescia-Rome-Brescia route.
Stirling Moss (GB), in 1955, along with his co-driver Denis Jenkinson (GB), became one of only three non-Italians to win the great race and many regarded it as Moss's best-ever drive.
His average speed of 157.62 kph (97.96 mph) was to remain an all-time record for the race over the full course.
The end of the Mille Miglia came in 1957, following an accident which resulted in the loss of 13 lives.
A Ferrari driven by Spanish aristocrat Marquis de Portago and his co-driver Ed Nelson careered out of control and into a group of spectators.
Portago, Nelson, five adults and six children were killed, and that was enough for officials to call a halt to the race.
For the next two year a smaller race around Brescia was held but the real Mille Miglia was gone for ever.
It had certainly achieved one of its aims and revived the Italian car industry, as home-produced cars won every race with the exception of three when German manufacturers Mercedes (twice) and BMW broke their domination.
Of the Italian manufacturers, Alfa Romeo dominated the pre-war races while Ferrari dominated the post-war era as Italy established itself as one of the leading motor racing nations.
MILLE MIGLIA
One of the greatest of all sports car road races ever run, the Mille Miglia was first held in 1927 and, by tradition, cars set off at one-minute intervals from the centre of Brescia, raced down to Rome and returned.
The course changed over the years and, in 1957, following a tragic accident, the last Mille Miglia was held although smaller version of the race around Brescia continued to be staged, and a series of nostalgic races has been held since 1982.
(See also feature on page 171)
TARGA FLORIO
The last of the truly great road races, the Targa Florio was the brainchild of wealthy Sicilian Vincenzo Florio who had a great love of racing cars.
The first Targa Florio was held on 6 May 1906 and that race, like all subsequent ones, was over a difficult and testing winding Sicilian course which varied over the years.
The last real Targa Florio was staged in 1973, thereafter it became a much "tamer" affair and ceased to be part of the Sports Car World Championship.
THE BIKE MEN
Many men have tried to make the switch from racing motorcycles to car, but most have failed, despite their impressive records on two wheels.
there have been exceptions, of course, and John Surtees stands alone as the one outstanding example of a champion on two and four wheels.
In fact he is the only man to win world titles at both codes.
Surtees started racing bikes in 1950 and had his first win at Brands Hatch on a Vincent in 1951 when only 17.
He joined the Norton works team in 1955.
A year later he joined the Italian MV team and that was to be the start of five glorious years for Surrey-born Surtees.
He won seven world titles including four 500 cc (three in succession 1958–60).
In addition he won six Isle of Man TT titles, including the Senior TT four times.
He started driving cars in 1959 and after the 1960 motorcycle season he devoted his energies to cars full time, originally in his own Formula Two car.
In 1962 he was invited to join the Ferrari team and two years later he was world champion when he pipped Graham Hill by one point.
Surtees was not content to end his career as the first dual world champion; he wanted more.
He tried his hand at the Can-Am series in North America.
A bad accident at Mosport nearly cost him his life but he came back and on his return to England joined the new Honda team.
After a brief spell with BRM he started manufacturing his own Formula One car but with little success.
If one man was likely to emulate Surtees' success it was Mike Hailwood, widely acknowledged as the greatest bike rider of all time.
Hailwood won nine world motorcycling titles (including four at 500 cc) and a record 14 Isle of Man TT races.
He first tried his hand at Formula One racing in 1963 but without much success.
In 1967 he concentrated on car racing full time.
He had success at Formula 5000 and when he returned to Formula One it was with better results that his first attempt.
His best finish was in the 1972 Italian Grand Prix at Monza when he finished second to Emerson Fittipaldi.
He ended the season in eighth position, the closest he came to repeating John Surtees' success.
Hailwood returned to bike racing and instantly re-found success.
Sadly he lost his life in a car accident near his Birmingham home in 1981.
Since then the only world motorcycling champion to show promise on four wheels has been Venezuelan Johnny Cecetto.
The world 750 cc champion in 1978, Cecetto burst onto the bike scene as a 19-year old in 1975 when he took the 350 cc crown.
Fearless and exciting to watch, he switched to car racing and in 1982 lost the European Formula Two championship by one point to Italian Corrado Fabi.
In 1983 he picked up his first (and only) Formula One world championship point in a Theodore-Ford in the United States Grand Prix(West) at Long Beach when he finished sixth.
John Surtees' record has not been threatened since he won the world drivers title in 1964.
And he looks like remaining the only two- and four-wheeled world champion for quite some time…unless Joey Dunlop, Eddie Lawson or Wayne Gardner have other ideas!
TASMAN CUP SERIES
Racing in Australia and New Zealand became very popular with Formula One teams and drivers in the mid-fifties.
As a result, an Intentional series, known as the Tasman Cup, was introduced in 1964 for the old 2½ litre formula.
As more and more Grand Prix races were added to the Formula One calendar the Cup lost its international appeal and in 1976 the Cup abolished to make way for the Formula Pacific Series in New Zealand, and the Formula 5000 Series in Australia.
CELLNET MOTOR SPORT AWARDS
In 1963 the annual Grovewood Motor Racing Awards were instituted, following an idea conceived by John Danny, chairman of Grovewood Securities Limited, operators of Brands Hatch, Snetterton and Oulton Park.
The leading prize was the Grovewood Award which went to the outstanding young driver of the year.
The winner is chosen by a panel of independent journalists and, in addition to receiving a trophy, receives financial support from the awards' sponsors.
Since 1986 the awards have carried the name of Cellnet.
THE BIRTH OF THE TURBOCHARGER
When the Renault RSO1 1500 cc turbo-charged car failed on lap 17 of the 1977 British Grand Prix at Silverstone, there must have been many people who did not see a future for this power-booster, particularly as it was the turbo-charger that caused the car's withdrawal from the race.
The RSO1 had a twin o.h.c.
V6 1492 cc engined with four valves per cylinder but was aided by a turbine compressor powered by the car's exhaust gases.
The unit, located between the engine and gearbox, was capable of producing 510 b.h.p. at 11 000 r.p.m.
Such was the improvement in turbo cars in such a short space of time that they were soon capable of producing anything up to 1300 b.h.p.
Renault showed they had a winner for the first time at the 1979 French Grand Prix when Jean-Pierre Jabouille (Fra) was first, with team-mate Rene Arnoux third.
Other manufacturers soon followed suit, notably Ferrari and Alfa Romeo.
Ferrari, in 1982, were the first Constructors' champions with a turbo car and within four years all manufacturers were running turbo-charged engines.
Ken Tyrell, an opponent of them since 1979, was the last manufacturer to power his cars with turbo-chargers.
Ten seasons after the introduction of the Renault RSO1 all manufacturers ran turbo-charged cars, and because of the increased power generated, the sport's governing body say a need to curtail its use.
The sport's governing body announced plans in 1986 for the phasing out of turbos, to be complete by the start of the 1989 season.
The phasing out was gradual with a complete return to 3.5 litre normally aspirated cars from the 1989 season, bringing an end to the turbo-charger…born 1977, died 1988.