

Snow in February
NORMAN NICHOLSON
Norman Nicholson is the present laureate of the Lakes.
His poems have brought him national acknowledgement and well-earned distinction.
His prose books on the district are first rate.
This is from Provincial Pleasures .
For nearly a week the fist of the frost has held tight to the land.
There have been brilliant Candlemas days when the tiles seemed to skip under the whip of the cold.
There have been opaque days, when the sky was heaped and blizzarded with snow, and yet the snow did not fall.
Only occasional flakes came haphazardly down like white sifts of charred paper when a chimney is on fire.
Everywhere else there was snow.
Scotland was kilt-deep in it; it was up to the lorry-axles on Shap, up to the bus-steps in London.
At Old Trafford it was wicket-high, and in Sussex it was up to the Downs.
On the brown fells above the estuary there were chalkings of snow, streaks and hatchings and high-lights.
But here all was bare.
Then yesterday morning the wind dodged into the southwest and thaw slithered across the land, and, suddenly, improbably, out of the thawing wind came the snow.
It melted as it fell, but not as fast as it fell.
Pavements and gutters were filled with cold tapioca pudding.
 "This'll soon get away," everyone said.
"It's wet as muck already.
It'll turn to rain in no time."
But in the evening, under the dark, the gulleys ceased to  drip, the pudding took a crust, and everyone was saying, "Shouldn't be surprised if it snowed again." 
Yet they were surprised.
One is always surprised by snow.
The streets themselves looked surprised, holding their breath in an anxious hush — a hush which is perhaps the strangest thing about the snow.
As you look at the street, seeing movement and hearing none, you feel as if an unnatural deafness had come upon you.
Your eyes and your ears do not co-ordinate; it is very much like the sensation of a fever.
The chimneys are bewildered, the roofs, slippery and uncertain.
Dormer windows prick up their ears like terriers.
The birds flop in the snow, learning to ski.
But the snow itself is completely without surprise.
I survey it from my bedroom window and everywhere it is quite at home.
It lies on the slates, unmarked except by sparrows; it swells and balloons over the edge of the launders.
The roofs have lost their straight-line geometry of slant and perpendicular.
The chimneys, hung with white soot, jerk up from a Moscow of onion-domed attics.
Starlings, blundering among the chimney pots, precipitate small avalanches over their tails.
Jackdaws, trying to settle on the watershed of a roof, find themselves top-heavy and fly away, clacking like nutcrackers.
The sparrows alone, with their urchin adaptability, have found their snow legs, and know already that today the street-bottoms are as safe as the air and that they run no danger from dog or bicycle.
The "lum hats" of the chimney-pots are padded with white felt on the one side.
A three-inch ribbon of snow, sideways up, is balanced on the telephone wires until, now and then, a bird lets on them, and ten or twenty yards fall like droppings into the street.
The spire of St Kentigern's, seen above the Banks, carries one elongated isosceles triangle of pure white from base to weathercock.
I push open my casement windows, making two carvings of snow tumble from the attic roof into the little balcony above the shop-window.
The snow-plough has not yet been round, but already the street is trampled by the men going to work.
No school-children so far, but I can hear the first faint scrapes and slushing of householders beginning to clean their pavements, and the sound is strange and hard to recognise in the almost silent air, seeming as if it came from  a long distance, a country sound in the wrong place.
Old Sprout, the greengrocer, banging the door behind him as he comes out of his shop, loosens half a card-load of snow, which skids off his roof and pancakes on the pavement, missing his head by no more than a foot.
 "Glory!" he says.
 "Greenland's icy mountains." 
Half a dozen of Chris Crackenthwaite's apprentices pass down the street just as the girls begin to arrive at the Market Hall factory.
At once there is a parabolic storm of snowballs.
Head-scarves, bootees, mackintoshes and woollen gloves are whirled and scrimmaged together.
The air glistens with screeching.
Snowballs explode like white bombs on doors and lamp-posts.
Girls, caught by the arm, have snow rubbed into their hair like salt into a herring.
Three of them, catching a youth who is trying to push a bicycle through a snowdrift, tip him into the gutter and stuff his shirt with snow.
Faces red as holly berries, mouths in a bubble of swearing, they dip and revel in the snow.
The Market Clock strikes eight.
Shaking the snow off their hair and coats, the girls skitter up the back stairs into the factory.
The sparrows once more take possession of the street.
Now it is twelve o'clock and school is out and all those who do not stay behind for dinner are bounding down Trafalgar Street, the little ones paddling up to the Wellington-tops in the drifts left on either side by the snow plough.
Ten minutes to shovel in a plateful of hot stew or fish and chips, and then out again into the back streets and down to the Iron Green.
The youngest of all have been here all morning, waddling in snow up to their arm-pits.
They are no longer playing with it or enjoying it, but try with a numb next-door-to-crying persistence to scramble over the wall and climb the slag-bank.
At every step they fall back, foxed and flummoxed by the snow, tripping over buried buckets, breaking their shins on hidden cobbles.
The elder boys are not deterred, however.
They know their way about the slag-bank as a shepherd knows his way about the fells.
They know every track and ledge in the slag; know how the rain has carved it into gulleys where now the snow lies deep as a crevasse; know how the surface of the slag is in parts rotten as scree, an in others as hard as iron.
They know, too, all the secret places of the bank: the nest of sandbags built during the War for the Home Guard; the ruins of Marsh Edge Farm that lies in an angle of the tip hidden from the town; the steps, cut in the slag-face, that lead down to the Ironworks Pier from which they can watch the boats.
This slag-bank is very old — belonging, for the most part, to the last years of the last century, when smelting was so extravagant with ore that some people say there was more iron in the slag than in the pig.
There has been no tipping here for many years, and already the bank seems to be slowly settling back into the earth from which it came.
Today, it is settled entirely, and seems as ancient a part of the landscape as the sea or the fells.
The snow drifts against its flanks, and collects in the creases and ghylls which split its sides, and piles up on ledges and parapets and corries.
Every now and then clouds of steam from the cooling reservoirs of the furnaces float over the skyline, It is an Icelandic scene of snow and hot-springs, of glacier, rock, cliffs, sky, and seabirds.
The sun comes out, and each boy is cartooned by his ironic shadow, and the willows become black hands clutching up from the snow.
The snow-dazzle, here, has the brilliancy and wideness of the Sahara sun, for this part of the town has nothing cramped about it.
When the people from Furnace Road visit the new housing estates they feel hemmed in, for though they live in a tight little terrace with backyard behind, and rug-sized gardens in front, they are used to a spaciousness that is due not to planning but to the lack of plan.
These small rows of houses look as if they had been dumped down like baggage on a railway platform while the owner goes for a sandwich.
Those on Furnace Road face across allotments and melancholy fields, that lead eventually to the mines.
The rest face nowhere.
And about all of them is the untidy spaciousness of land which has been forgotten, greens, allotments, sumps, dumps, and slag-holes.
The Furnace Arms stands solid and square as a block of concrete, its door and eight windows marking right-angles of shadow in the gleaming stucco.
It looks as isolated as an eighteenth-century farmhouse among the fells.
Indeed, it is very like a farmhouse inside, with a flagstone floor and a while deal table in the  enormous, kitchen-like bar-parlour, and clean sawdust every day in the Jubilee spittoons.
( "A free pint if you cop the Queen in the eye," says Chunker Wilson.)
The boys return to school.
The sun swings and sinks.
Shadows merge into the snow; the woodcut turns into a shadowy chalk drawing.
And the elder Miss Snoot at her window high up in Old Odborough looks over the roofs of the town.
It is early evening.
Snow and cloud are in collusion and the town is more of a memory than a view.
It is impossible to tell which is earth and which is sky, though eastward what looks like a whiter than usual cloud must surely be snow on the fells of Furness.
Nearer, a blur of smoke and mist is simmering up from the snow, among all the spikiness of spire and steeple, chimney-stack and telegraph pole, the pinnacles of chapels and ventilators of schools.
The houses of Old Odborough are already lighting up for the evening, but it is not yet dark enough to see the lights farther away.
Miss Snoot will be glad when it is dark.
She hates Odborough and does not want to see more of it than need be.
When her father retired she and her sisters begged him to rake a bungalow up the coast, but he insisted on remaining in Odborough, choosing this house from where he can see, half a mile away, the roof and chimney of the shop where he made his money.
He is sitting there now, fat and inanimate as a sack of flour, staring out of the window as the lights come on.
Soon the blurred sketch of the view will disappear and in its place will come an entanglement of lights.
It is old Mr Snoot's ambition to learn to recognise every one of them.
As the years go on he is gradually charting his universe, plotting each constellation and learning the names of every major star.
Straight ahead is what he calls Orion, the three lights of the furnace top making the belt.
Away to the south-west, well clear of the town, is the Plough or Great Bear — six or seven distant lights scattered among the farms around Oatrigg.
To the east, the lights of Beckside Station, across the estuary, make the Little Bear.
And running diagonally across his star-map is the Milky Way — the cream and dazzle of lights that  stretch from the goods-yard down the Ironworks sidings, along the foot of the slag-bank, to the Ironworks themselves.
But it is no longer these stars of the first magnitude that hold his fancy.
It is the lesser lights, the little twinkles from alley and shop or upstairs window that no one but himself could attempt to identify.
It fills him with strange satisfaction to think that while the great illumination of the Market Square is quite invisible from this point, the little lamps of Iron Green can be seen glowing through a gap beyond Albert Road, It is many years now since he has visited the lower end of Odborough, for his legs will not carry him up and down the hill, and he growls like a dog if anyone suggests a car.
But the sight of a street-lamp or a window light that he can recognise hooks up memories like fish from a pool.
Then the night glows with an illuminated slide of The Crown Green, and the naphtha flares round the hobby horses, and Happy Homes Ltd, where the served his apprenticeship, bright as Jupiter in an extravagance of gas.
It is immensely difficult to identify these smaller lights.
He will fix his eyes on some spot that he thinks he knows and watch it intently as the day fades, hoping to be able to plot any light that may appear later on.
The view is always dimmed out, however, before the light declares itself, and there is a period of blurred dark when perspective shuts up like a concertina and the eye loses its bearings.
It would be easier, he thinks, at dawn, to fix his gaze steadily on one particular light and then to establish its place in the returning landscape.
But his daughters, on whom he is as dependent as a baby, refuse to get up in what they call the middle of the night to enable him to pursue his observations.
He glances towards Oatrigg, lifting his eyes to the other sky.
Venus is powerful, in spite of the ground mist.
It strikes him suddenly that Venus is in the wrong place.
She does not belong in that unpeopled swash of sunset above the dunes and the sea.
She belongs, surely, where he had seen her a thousand times as he came out of Happy Homes, just above the end pinnacle of the Wesleyan Methodist Chapel.
Perhaps on a hundredth of those thousand times, seeing her there, it had moved him to think how in so many towns like Odborough men were looking up at her as they shut shops or walked home from mills and mines.
And he would think how to  each of them she had her proper place, to the left of the Town Clock or to the right of the water-rower — one single, certain planet shining across all the roofs of England.
He returns to his routine, but finds that once again he has failed.
While his thoughts were on Venus the landscape was rubbed away like chalk from a blackboard and he has lost the means of identifying the newly discovered stars…
Miss Snoot moves as if to draw the curtains, but her father forbids her with a shake of his head.
Not that he wants to look out of the window any longer.
Instead, his mind is on the great frosts of his youth, when the snow lay so deep on The Crown Green that they had to dig a trench to the shop door.
When the railway and the two roads were blocked with drifts, and not a train or a letter or a newspaper came to the town for a week.
When old Aaron Tyson from Limestone Hill sold to the greengrocer's the turnips he'd stacked up for his sheep.
When women went on their knees to Absalom Dale, of Cheap and Best, for a handful of yeast.
When the Dunner froze at low tide and you could skate from Odborough to Furness.
When it was so cold in the winding shed at the mines that the men begged to go down the pit to get warm.
He revels in the memory of it, making it froth and lather all round the alleys and back-yards of youth very nearly up to the roof-tops.
It is a sign you are growing old when you do not enjoy the snow.
But when you are indeed old, then you can enjoy it again.
He does not have to worry any longer about the slither and the slush.
 "Let it snow till it reaches the chimney-pots," he says to himself.
Let is now up to the Market Clock.
Let the snow heap itself high as the slag-bank, high as the furnace chimneys, high as St Kentigern's steeple.
In a warm blizzard of drowsiness he watches the snow sud and curdle over the roofs and spires of the New Town, mounting up the slope of Old Odborough, up the hill of the Main Street, till it reaches Mount Pleasant.
And when at last it drifts through the window and fluffs all round his feet and legs, even then he does not let himself be disturbed.