

1 The college experience
Saturday 23 April.
Between five and six we set out.
We had a very good journey, and we chatted a good deal.
I got to Oxford about six.
The ideas which I had conceived of that noble university were realised when I saw it…
I sauntered about for an hour before I could find Sir James Macdonald…
He had with him [four students who]talked of learning too much; and in short were just young old men without vivacity.
I grew very melancholy and wearied.
At night I had a bed at the Blue Boar Inn.
I was unhappy to a very great degree.
James Boswell's London Journal (1762–3)
This chapter tries to do three things:
1.
To investigate what's meant by "the college experience" .
2.
To examine the nature of human learning.
3.
To suggest ways of finding your way around college.
WHAT'S COLLEGE FOR?
It may be a new experience for you — but students have been going to college for at least two-and-a-half thousand years!
So we should probably begin by asking what college is for and reviewing the various arguments that surround it.
From Plato's Academy, in fifth-century BC Athens, to the latest government report on higher education, experts have been pronouncing on the value of college education — what it contributes to the development of individual character and what to society.
Despite these centuries of thought, there's still no clear consensus on what the purpose of college is — or should be.
Two schools of thought predominate.
Adherents of the first school advocate "pure education" or "education for its own sake" .
They argue that college provides an intellectual and moral training that equips a person for the ups and downs of life — personal, social and professional.
On intellectual development, they cite the example of the British Civil Service that, since the Northcote-Trevelyan Reforms of 1854, has filled its policy-making posts with graduates, selected for their demonstrated capacity for independent thought, their ability to learn and to perform to high intellectual standards, without regard to academic specialization.
The permanent secretaries in charge of many government departments are arts graduates who have risen through the ranks of the meritocracy to become Knights of the Realm and heads of Oxbridge colleges, simply by virtue of their intellectual training, character, hard work and a modicum of good luck.
They mastered their profession, as it were, along the way.
Since adherents of this first school regard college as primarily an intellectual training ground, they stress the inherent educational value of such subjects as classical languages (Greek and Latin), political philosophy or English literature, all of which encourage the development of sensitivity, subtle and flexible reasoning, intellectual ingenuity and the willingness to see all sides of an argument.
Adherents of the second school bewail Britain's poor economic performance and diminished standing in the world, which they attribute in large measure to the lack of relevance in much that is taught in colleges.
They claim to have discovered a close relationship between the rate of growth in Gross National Product and the type of college education favoured by Britain's economic competitors, arguing that the nations that prosper most are those that prepare their students best for the "enterprise culture" of the late twentieth century.
Adherents of this second school favour the teaching of such vocational subjects as economics, accounting and law, science and engineering, computing and information technology — because these  subjects are all directly relevant to the world of work.
They would not proscribe the teaching of fine art, archaeology or music — but would much prefer to see British colleges turning out many more vocation-ally-trained graduates in science, technology and business management.
If, then, we define the first aim of college as being to provide an intellectual training in the useful arts, we might leave both schools to continue their debate on what exactly constitutes usefulness in a rapidly-changing economic and social world.
The second aim of college has to do with the encouragement of individual difference and the development of personality.
Here there is more general agreement.
Education is seen as a process of nurturing individuality, of fostering distinctive qualities that already reside within each individual.
College should therefore encourage students to become more autonomous, to develop greater self-awareness, to fulfil their potentiality by exerting effort and will-power to achieve their highest standards of attainment — whether it be the completion of a first-year essay, an honours dissertation or a doctorate of philosophy.
This self-actualization ( "becoming your best self" ) is widely seen as the most valuable benefit of college study.
To put it another way, "Education is what's left when you've forgotten all you ever learned" .
 "The college experience" might, therefore, be described as a voyage of self-discovery, self-development and preparation for self-fulfilment.
It's an experience that is undeniably concerned with the acquisition of facts, the deepening and broadening of knowledge and the development of character.
It therefore has everything to do with the psychological growth, development and fulfilment of the whole person — with a unique biography, unique gifts, unique problems and a unique contribution to make to society.
You don't study these subjects at college: they are the incidental, unintended, beneficial result of submitting yourself to "the college experience" .
LEARNING CAN BE FUN
If all this sounds heavy and pompous, it's worth pointing out that college experience also offers intellectual excitement.
In short, learning can be fun — provided you equip yourself sensibly for the voyage of self-discovery.
You must be prepared to take some risks and be willing to learn from your mistakes.
Paradoxically, you should see the voyage of self-discovery as a shared experience, in which you seek to increase your own competence and self-confidence by means of mutually-rewarding relationships with your fellow students, your teachers and other members of college staff.
As the Introduction said, studying for survival and success will be hard work but it should not be drudgery.
There should be room for relaxation, for sport, for social and cultural activities as well as academic work.
Colleges do not admit students unless they seem capable of sustaining and successfully completing their college courses — and of entering fully into college life.
Despite careful selection, however, a proportion of students drop out of college each year for a variety of personal reasons: exam failure; illness; and family or other personal circumstances.
Some drop out is probably inevitable.
But it is also very costly — to the individual, to the college and to society generally.
Chapter 6 offers specific advice on some aspects of developing good study habits, but it's important at this early stage to understand something about human learning.
What exactly do we mean by "learning" ?
How does the brain work?
Does everybody learn in the same way, or in different ways?
1.
Learning is a natural — one might say an instinctive — human activity.
All animals appear to have some capacity to learn from experience.
But humans have a far higher capacity than lower-order animals.
2.
Learning in humans begins at birth and continues until very old age or death, unless brain incapacity intervenes.
So, learning is not quite the same as education.
3.
Learning is a process whereby knowledge, skills and attitudes are acquired or modified in such a way that human behaviour is more or less permanently changed.
We learn by acquiring new ideas, concepts and values — or by displacing old ones.
4.
Un-learning is more difficult than learning — because we become habituated to thinking or feeling in certain ways over time.
So, it takes longer to eradicate old learning (bad intellectual habits) than to acquire new learning (good intellectual habits).
5.
Learning, like all other forms of human behaviour, is a motivated activity.
We do not learn unless we wish to learn — although some individuals still find it difficult to learn, despite their strong motivation, because of some learning block.
Such learners need special counselling.
6.
Individuals learn in different ways.
There is no such thing as "best practice" when it comes to human learning.
Whatever works best for the individual is the best way to learn.
7.
There appear to be few limits to the human capacity to learn.
The brain — like any other human organ — can tire.
But there is no such thing as limited brain capacity.
Most humans use only a small fraction of their total useful brainpower.
8.
Learning is both a conscious and an unconscious human activity.
We may pick up (i.e. learn) bad habits (e.g. nail-biting) without realizing it.
We absorb (i.e. learn) a great deal of French vocabulary, grammar and syntax by listening to people speaking French without making a conscious effort to learn the language.
Other subjects — like calculus or computing — cannot be learned without some conscious effort.
FINDING YOUR WAY AROUND COLLEGE
If you are to enjoy the college experience to the full, you need to lose no time in finding your way around college.
The sooner you "sus out" what happens at college, the sooner you'll settle down and begin to enjoy the college experience.
Students who drop out or who fail their college courses are often those who failed to come to terms quickly with their new environment and to make the necessary personal adjustments to fit into that environment.
You must adapt to suit the environment — the environment can't change just for you!
First, you should recognize that you need to be much more self-reliant than you've ever been before.
Nobody will come looking for you if you don't get up in the morning or fail to appear for a 9 o'clock lecture.
If you persistently fail to appear, your teachers will note your absence and the college authorities will probably institute enquiries.
But, generally speaking, you're expected to be a self-starter at college.
Second, you need to master the geography of your college and learn how long it takes to get to and from various locations.
There's nothing worse than arriving fifteen minutes late for a lecture or laboratory practical to find out that other students have stolen a march on you.
That does not mean giving up lectures.
It means organizing yourself to arrive at places on time, without external promptings.
Perhaps you need to buy a reliable alarm clock, or give up early-morning TV and settle for hearing the day's news on radio.
(See Chapter 5 for further detailed advice on managing your time at college.)
Third, we need to remind ourselves that the college experience comprises your own self-discovery in the company of other members of the college community.
Every college is a community of scholars — teaching, learning, reading, writing, experimenting, offering advice and consulting one another— sharing the college life together.
You must discover how and when to take part in that sharing.
But you must also find ways of working alone and becoming more self-reliant.
Suppose, for example, you've been given a problem to work on by one  of your teachers.
How long should you spend on that problem alone — and when do you turn to fellow students to share ideas on possible solutions?
There are no hard-and-fast rules.
You must simply strike a sensible balance between working alone at your problems and collaborating with others.
But, however you begin, you should end up by sharing your own findings, your own views and conclusions with others.
To share with others, you need to know where to find them.
Just as you may resent being disturbed in the college library, so fellow students don't enjoy being interrupted in the middle of some important piece of work.
In any case, the library is not the place to talk through mutual problems: much better to meet in the refectory, cafeteria or dining-room.
We suggest you find out where your newly-acquired friends and acquaintances tend to gather at different times of the day.
In that way you won't feel cut off and isolated at college and will know where to seek out help when you think you need it.
You should develop your own reliable method of recording the names of people and places; college buildings and their quaint room-numbering systems; opening and closing hours of libraries, college and faculty offices; student-welfare and advisory-staff offices' telephone numbers.
You don't need to become a slave to Filofax — but you probably do need a college diary or alphabetical address book with space for telephone numbers, etc.
Finally, you should set aside some time every week to take stock of your work and your progress.
Try designating the same time every week — like Friday or Sunday evening.
Keep a record of how you spend your time and what you've managed to get done during the previous week.
Then develop a weekly list of the tasks you hope to achieve during the week ahead.
Number the items and try placing an "urgency rating" against each item: x- for those books already overdue at the library; for that essay to be presented by next Monday; for the tutorial paper you're committed to give next Tuesday; for less urgent items, like the laundry or shopping you must try to have done by the weekend.
2 Accommodation
My first encounter with Cambridge (in 1936) was with Mrs Stubbins, my landlady, whose house overlooked Midsummer Common.
Her hair was done up in curl papers and wire clips and she wore a faded apron.
Her manner was impersonal and she seemed to regard my arrival with some relief, as if a problem had been solved.
She showed me to my rooms and called my attention to a postcard on the mantlepiece from my tutor…
Mrs Stubbins' manner suggested that I was in for trouble.
H.S. Ferns, A Reading from Left to Right: One Mans Political History (1983)
This chapter tries to do three things:
1.
To stress the importance of a roof over your head.
2.
To outline the range of possible student housing.
3.
To explain the advantages and disadvantages of each.
A ROOF OVER YOUR HEAD
Are you a stereotypical middle-class undergraduate, driven to the university or polytechnic of your choice by your proud parent, complete with hi-fi, food hamper, alarm clock, extra socks and pleas to phone home regularly?
If so, you'll have probably booked your place in a hall of residence, your grant will arrive on the first day of term, you'll be ready to enjoy Freshers' Fair and soon settle down to studies in the library.
Perhaps you're less well-prepared, with fewer resources and had to scrabble around to find your college place through Clearing?
Or a mature student, apprehensive about coping with study after such a long absence, worried about managing financially and missing your children and family?
Does your college have enough accommodation to offer?
Each new academic year, the media presents a pretty accurate picture of the accommodation crisis, with students having to doss down in seminar rooms while hundreds of unhoused students search for a more suitable base.
The forced camaraderie and freedom from normal constraints may have its attractions.
But the lack of sleep, washing facilities, privacy and the delay in settling usefully into your studies is not a good start to college life.
This period can be profoundly depressing and some students withdraw at this point.
It's impossible to start studying seriously until you've found a roof over your head that suits your needs and allows a clear head for studying.
The realities of student housing
All universities and polytechnics (and most other colleges) have an accommodation office for student housing.
Some offices send out information automatically while others wait for you to approach them.
This office should always be your first point of contact.
In fact, it's probably wise to contact the accommodation office when considering a particular college because their housing policy may affect your final choice of where to study.
Accommodation offices provide information on the types of housing available locally, on college policy regarding priority for halls of residence, comparative costings, lists of housing in the private sector and considerable back-up on your legal rights, housing law, etc.
The latter are particularly important because the 1989 Housing Act, changes the status of landlords and tenants considerably, affecting security and rents.
Where supplies are available and you're offered a choice, it's sensible to check out the accommodation on offer.
You need to be realistic about the amount and type of belongings you'll bring with you.
For example, you may have a choice of accommodation on campus or off, with meals or without.
There are advantages and disadvantages of each and you may need to see them all before deciding.
THE RANGE OF STUDENT ACCOMMODATION
Halls of residence
Colleges with their own halls can normally house only a small proportion of students.
Most give priority to first-year, some to final-year students, but few can house all students throughout their course.
Some offer rooms at a meals-inclusive charge, others are increasingly self-catering with shared kitchens.
Most have individual rooms with washing facilities; others have rooms for sharing.
Many of the newer halls have some rooms suitable for the disabled, who normally get priority to stay throughout the course.
With some halls on campus and others off, you need to consider the pluses and minuses: the first eliminates travel time and expense but you may feel isolated from the wider community; the second involves travel time and fares but provides more choice of shops and entertainment, with an escape from the enclosed campus.
Halls normally charge a term's rent in advance.
That's an immense chunk of grant to allocate early on but it allows you to budget carefully the meagre remains.
A distinct advantage is that the costs are clear and explicit, inclusive of heating and hot water, without extras — except perhaps for laundry.
Until the property-price boom, halls were often more expensive than private housing.
But, unless colleges change their pricing policies radically, halls are likely to continue to provide cheaper, housing and greater security of tenure than the private sector.
You re normally expected to vacate halls of residence during vacations, during which time you are not responsible for rent — unlike much of the private housing available.
Halls are usually run by a warden with a democratically-elected student committee that attempts to sort out amicable solutions to some of the difficulties and charms of communal living — such as small-hour parties on one side of a desperate-to-sleep student with reggae or Mozart on the other!
Head tenancies
Colleges without adequate halls of residence may offer a second-best  alternative in which they lease property directly from landlords and then sublet to students.
The college controls the lettings and acts as landlord to the students while responsible to the landlord as "head tenant" .
The students have the security of the college behind them but the landlord retains the right of guaranteed vacant possession according to the specific lease with the college.
Prices of head tenancy lets are usually somewhere between halls and full market rents.
Private-rented housing
For students unable to obtain a place in hall for their first or subsequent years, the remaining choice lies in the private-rented sector.
The announced intention behind the 1989 Housing Act is to increase the stock of rented housing — which has steadily diminished over the years.
That intention may indeed be achieved but the proposed relaxation of rent control could result in a further considerable increase in house prices, affecting all traditional users of this type of property — the young, the single and the less-financially secure.
The quality and price of private housing varies enormously both between city centres and suburbs and between different geographical areas.
The further the accommodation is from college, the cheaper it's likely to be.
But travels costs have then to be taken into account.
Because of the disparity in quality — and despite the housing shortage — it's vital to inspect property first before paying any advanced deposits.
The high cost of private housing in a contracting market is a crucial factor in considering the consequences for student well-being.
The search is usually hard enough in itself but many students will also have to compromise their standards.
If you're away from home for the first time, you may well feel lonely and unhappy — a major contributory factor in student depression and withdrawal from college.
The college student counselling services are well-experienced in such matters and can be very supportive.
Where to find private housing
Most college accommodation offices produce lists of private landlords and landladies, updated regularly throughout the academic year.
Local newspapers, noticeboards, shop windows and word of mouth can also be useful as sources of information.
Speed is of the essence when following up newspaper advertisements.
Go for the early editions and be ready to act immediately.
Beware of the subjective attitudes of landlords/landladies about your appearance, habits and origins.
And don't bother to go unless you can  provide immediate deposits of at least one month's rent in advance.
Because of the extreme housing shortage it's a first-come, first-served, first-secured process.
The nature of private housing
For sharing Self-contained houses/flats without landlords on the premises are usually the most popular because of relative lack of restrictions, and the ability to choose sharers.
These can often be made cheaper per head by squeezing one person more than recommended into the household.
However, landlords usually calculate the rent on what they consider to be reasonable use of shared facilities, which is already to their advantage.
Over-crowding can create unpleasant pressures and more bad feeling within the shared household than anything else.
Queuing up for the bathroom and kitchen cooker can create explosive feelings.
Further potential for ill-feeling and hardship arises when the tenants are all jointly responsible for the rent but one decides to move without warning, creating a rent hardship for those who remain.
Single bedsitters Some single bedsitters have cooking facilities in the room.
While the sole use of a baby cooker or gas ring has certain advantages, its use can create lingering smells in the only living space, and may also present a fire risk.
Other bedsitters share cooking facilities and bathroom with other students or members of the public, not chosen by you.
Disadvantages include the fact that you have no control over other tenants and the consequences of their habits.
Advantages include the fact that you are not responsible for their rents if they leave and that you have a clearly-defined personal space, however small.
Landlords of private accommodation may expect rents paid throughout the vacations even if you're not resident.
Others may require a retainer or reduced rent instead.
Lodgings/digs These are generally unpopular with most students because of cost, set meal times and general restrictions — such as the number of baths allowed — and the times by which you are expected to be home and in bed!
Very few students now choose to adopt a well-meaning motherly landlady or a battleaxe with inflexible house-rules.
Many students choose a college some way from home precisely to get away from such domestic restrictions.
This also provides a convenient and acceptable way of avoiding adolescent friction with parents.
Some students, nevertheless, prefer this type of accommodation because it is often more homely than college hall.
Council accommodation
Some local authorities have unlettable, poor standard or high-rise  property considered unsuitable for family households, which they may be prepared to let to students.
When councils have the money to refurbish such property they then have the power to end your tenancy.
Such accommodation is likely to be withdrawn as councils Increasingly sell off property to private developers.
Again, other homeless people from the council waiting list may be offered such property, however inadequate, as an alternative to "bed and breakfast" accommodation.
But it's always worth checking with local councils and your college for possible vacant housing of this sort.
Some mature students with children or families, already occupying council accommodation elsewhere, may wish to explore the possibility of council-property exchange through their local authority, for the duration of their course, or permanently.
It's important not to lose your security of tenure in council accommodation — which is so hard to come by in the first place — by making yourself"voluntarily homeless'.
Such may be the consequence of subletting council property without prior approval of the local authority, in order to live closer to college.
The 1989 Housing Act is likely to increase insecurity of council property as well as private property.
Absence from property, rent arrears and unapproved subletting will put tenants at considerable risk of eviction.
Accommodation agencies
These differ from college accommodation services in that they act not for the prospective tenant but on behalf of the landlords by pre-sifting applicants.
Some agencies are explicit that they do not deal with properties below a certain rent level, while others discriminate against students or other groups.
Using an agency can be expensive because the fees they charge, over and above the rent, are usually equivalent to one or two weeks' rent, plus a substantial deposit.
Some disreputable agencies try to charge just for putting your name on their lists although this is illegal.
Its therefore wise to check out agency reputation, charges and terms before paying out any money.
Hostels
Run on commercial lines or by organizations like housing associations, the YMCA or religious denominations, the best of these are as good if not better than college halls of residence.
Others are very different in quality, sometimes requiring up to six people to share a room.
Most provide meals.
Hostels, like halls of residence, which cater for single people unable to find single accommodation, are normally over-subscribed and operate waiting lists.
Your college accommodation office should be able to advise about local availability, conditions, etc.
Squatting
If all else fails, you may be forced to squat in unoccupied property.
This is not to be recommended for reasons of comfort, security and the complication of getting supplies of gas, electricity, etc.
But squatting itself is not illegal if you go about it the right way.
Before considering squatting, you should obtain legal and practical advice either from your college accommodation office, the citizens advice bureau or the Advisory Service for Squatters (2 St Paul's Road, London, N1).
The latter also publishes an excellent and comprehensive Squatters' Handbook.
WARNING CHECKLIST FOR ALL PRIVATE-SECTOR ACCOMMODATION
1.
Don't pay any money without a receipt stating explicitly what you've paid for.
2.
Find out whether deposits are returnable — and under what conditions.
3.
Try to get a rent book.
4.
Check whether full rent or a retainer is required during vacations.
5.
Do you have exclusive/shared use of kitchen, bathroom, loo, etc.?
6.
Who is responsible for damage to property, repairs, redecorations?
7.
Is there a furniture inventory?
8.
What security of tenure do you have?
9.
In a shared property, is the tenancy jointly held or are residents individual licensees?
10.
How much notice is required on either side to terminate the tenancy agreement?
11.
Are the costs of heating and hot water inclusive or exclusive?
12.
Are there any rules about shares, keys, hours, etc.?
13.
Is it your responsibility to provide linen, blankets, cooking utensils, etc.
14.
If you are required to sign contracts, take them first for checking to the college accommodation office or the citizens advice bureau.
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF EACH
Discrimination
Some landlords welcome students from overseas because of the  possibility of high rents and limited tenancy periods.
Agencies and landlords are not legally allowed to discriminate on grounds of race but ways are invariably found around this.
Owners are allowed to discriminate when they live on the premises and share facilities such as the kitchen and bathroom with the tenants.
Similarly, boarding houses with no more than six tenants are allowed to discriminate.
We still hear of black students who make telephone appointments to view property, only to be told it's already gone when they arrive to view.
Such attitudes are hard to a shift even though discrimination in housing is illegal under the race relations legislation.
Others discriminate against students on grounds of sexual orientation when they suspect them of being gay or lesbian; others on class or a whole range of subjective, stereotypical responses to the unfamiliar.
Many of these types of discrimination are illegal but again they're hard to prove.
Harassment
Landlords sometimes use subtle forms of harassment to force tenants to move, such as refusal to implement vital repairs, unreasonable service charges, cutting off the telephone, etc.
Others harass by invasion of privacy, with unreasonable entry into the property or even into individual rooms, on a variety of pretexts.
Female students are particularly prone to sexual harassment by both landlords and other tenants.
In such cases, there should be no hesitation in calling the police immediately, to prevent escalation of such difficulties.
Help with high rents — and Housing Benefit
Prices, already escalating, are likely to become even more prohibitive with the 1989 Housing Act.
Water rates and 20-per-cent local-authority rates may be passed on to the student as a result of the Social Security Act 1988 and the proposed Community Charge is also likely to increase rents still further.
How can students cope with the limited resources at their command?
To some extent, students are worse off financially with regard to housing costs than people on Income Support who are automatically entitled to Housing Benefit.
The student grant, equivalent only to low-income-level subsistence (even if the parent or spouse pays their full calculated contribution), does not attract the same right to Housing Benefit.
In calculating the amount of Housing Benefit, regulations stipulate that it must be assumed that the student is in receipt of the full grant.
Whilst the student grant contains a fixed amount for housing, it is generally regarded as well below market rates that, of course, vary  according to area.
That element within the grant is currently £17.80 per week in London (summer, 1988).
Eligibility for Housing Benefit only begins, therefore, for that portion of the rent that exceeds the housing element with the grant.
A student in college accommodation (halls of residence and probably head tenancies because of possible subsidies) has no right to Housing Benefit other than in the summer vacation.
This is because the housing element within the grant is calculated for the duration of the academic year (continuous from beginning of autumn term until the end of the academic year).
Those students resident in private accommodation can claim Housing Benefit during the period of study, but only for that element of rent that exceeds the grant contribution.
So the amount of Housing Benefit is likely to be very small.
Few private tenants in the past have appealed against rent levels for fear of landlord harassment and eviction but the limited controls on rent that currently exist are likely to lessen still further when the Housing Act takes effect.
However bad a landlord, there is a crucial rule that needs to be kept in mind if you don't want to put yourself on the wrong side of the law.
Never withhold rent.
Argue, take advice — whatever — but rent arrears are a certain route to eviction.
With the 1989 Housing Act in effect, this will be even more strongly enforced than at present.
Because private accommodation is usually paid a month at a time, as compared to a term in advance in halls of residence, it's often tempting to lull oneself into a false sense of secure finances, spending money that should have been put aside for the rent.
Remember that landlords and landladies are less tolerant of rent arrears than college authorities and you may be putting your tenancy at risk if you fall behind with the rent.
With the possibility of the whole structure of student finance changing from grants to part or full loans, entitlement to Housing Benefit may vary possibly increasing eligibility to Housing Benefit.
Legislation on that, however, is still in the future.
One thing is certain.
Rents are already high and going higher.
Students suffer considerable hardship as a result.
Many a student has found the route to vegetarianism via depleted funds.
The communal rice-pot tends to get fewer and less-exotic additions as the grant dwindles.
Students may attempt forced economies on diet or take up casual part-time employment to balance their budgets, but you will have to assess for yourself the degree to which these actions may detract from your physical well-being and ability to study (see also Chapter 15 on fit for studying).
Here again, student counsellors in college may help in talking you through such problems.
Security of tenure
This varies with the type of tenancy, but in all private lettings other than those where meals are provided, the tenant normally has protected tenure.
The nature of that protection will depend on whether you've undertaken a holiday let, a licence or a fixed-term agreement.
Many landlords try to get round the law by letting under one of these headings because of the degree of control they can exercise over the duration of the tenancy and over individual tenants.
Students with individual licences within a shared tenancy, for example, have no control over the landlord's choice of other tenants with whom they may be forced to share.
But distinctions between the definitions of tenancies and licence are unclear and need to be clarified legally.
Such tenancy agreements may be redefined under the 1989 Housing Act.
Consult your accommodation office for further help with individual contracts before putting your signature to them.
Notice to quit
Landlords are normally required to give twenty-eight days' written notice to quit.
Landladies of lodgings can ask you to go sooner.
Legislation on this subject is likely to change for all new tenancies under the 1989 Housing Act.
So watch out!
Security
Your personal belongings may be frugal and of little extrinsic value, but when they are lost or stolen, the cost of replacement can be surprisingly high and the distress caused may be considerable.
Many students arrive at college with a new hi-fi, camera, radio, etc., which are cherished possessions.
But because of communal living in halls of residence, shared housing and lodgings, it's not always possible to prevent access to your room and belongings.
So, again, watch out!
Some students provide their own padlocks to rooms but the authorities or landlords may not allow this for reasons such as cleaning, safety, etc.
When shared occupation is such that many people have front-door keys and some are not as careful as others about locking the front door, obvious risks occur.
So it's crucial to insure your belongings from the outset.
Some insurance companies have let-out clauses for those in high-risk shared occupancy, but there are some companies that specialize in students and offer reasonable terms.
Your students' union will advise you.
It's false economy not to have insurance on your belongings.
DO'S AND DON'TS OF SHARED LIVING
You don't know a person until you've lived with them!
This is familiar, even banal, but true.
The student who seems fascinating across a seminar room, or the sorrowful homesick student in the crowded bar, on whom you take pity — these are not necessarily the ones with whom it might be best to share a kitchen all year.
But desperation leads people into rushed decisions when one or two people are urgently needed to make up a complement of tenants for a specific property.
Students desperate to leave home may find themselves in a worse situation than the one they left.
If at all possible, it's wise to discuss attitudes to communal living before jointly moving in.
In an ideal situation, flat and house sharers will have a less-anxious living space if they work out a few basic rules beforehand, which they all agree to comply with later.
Here are some of the issues:
1.
Rotas for house cleaning, loo disinfecting, washing up, cooker cleaning and decisions about kitty and shopping for basic shared commodities such as tea, coffee, loo paper, need to be clearly written down and displayed for all to see.
2.
If and when a participant to the agreement fails to carry out one of his or her duties, will you let it ride, gripe endlessly about it or decide in advance a system of penalties?
3.
Will you be cooking for yourself, communally or in turns?
4.
What about laundry?
Will you have a system whereby one person in turn takes the communal dirty washing to the launderette, spill it out onto a hopefully clean floor, for all to fight over whose socks are whose?
Or complain because someone's red shirt has run?
Or will you just do you own?
5.
Who's in charge of the vegetable rack and cleaning of cupboards?
Rotting carrots can poison both the atmosphere of the kitchen and the relationship.
6.
How often are the cooker and the bath to be cleaned?
After every use or weekly?
Whose responsibility is it?
Too often the role is left to a houseproud male or to the women who dig their own grave when entrapping themselves into a traditional duty, by doing it themselves out of resignation.
7.
If a fond mum sends you back after a weekend at home with your favourite fruit cake, do you keep it in a tin under the bed and eat it secretly, or demolish it at one swoop by sharing it with others?
Communal living can create other strains.
Those who invite friends or partners to share their rooms for short or long periods, without first discussing it with co-tenants, are bound to create resentment, let alone increased pressure on shared facilities.
Despite all the rational discussions that might ideally have been held before taking on tenancies, there's nearly always one who takes liberties like this.
Moreover, some sharers will change housing during the year by offering their room to another without prior discussion.
The incomer might not agree to any existing house rules or feel that they can ignore them because they were not party to them initially.
Once house rules break down, it's very difficult to reinstate them.
Relationships are affected, quarrels erupt, studies suffer.
The best remedy to all such difficulties is not to harbour grievances silently but to raise the problems as they arise and to deal with them before they get out of control.
Nevertheless, shared housing in private or college accommodation can be as educative and stimulating as the studies for which you primarily go to college.
To learn how to cope in such fraught situations and to survive can be a broadening experience.
However tough things might have been at home, there's usually an underlying familiarity of experience that allows family members to overcome or endure difficulties.
In sharing a home with a stranger who shares no common standards of behaviour, compromises and allowances are not so easily made.
Making it work with people from different backgrounds and different cultures can be exciting and life-enhancing.
When it does work, lifelong friendships can be forged with those you might never otherwise have been likely to meet.
Thus, rather than reinforcing stereotypical responses to the unfamiliar faces around, student living can be one of the most hopeful ways of breaking down prejudice.
If all this seems very technical, detailed and depressing, do not despair!
There is still good accommodation to be found in most college towns and cities and not all is of the type found in the following advertisement, which recently appeared in a London evening newspaper:
TO LET Desirable converted stair cupboard in Chelsea property.
Internal fan.
Share kitchen/bathroom with 4 others.
Suit student.
A STUDENT CHECKLIST FOR FINDING ACCOMMODATION
1.
Contact the college accommodation office as early as possible.
2.
If the college offers first-year students priority for halls of residence, hedge your bets by applying for a place whether or not that is your first choice.
3.
Consider the pros and cons of halls of residence on campus and off.
4.
If your choice is, or you are forced to find, housing in the private sector, don't leave the search until the day before term commences.
Consider taking a cheap base in the area before term starts from which you can study the area and the vacancies, and be ready to pounce from close at hand.
5.
If you are looking for advertised vacancies in local newspapers, always buy the early edition, and follow up immediately.
6.
Have plenty of coins, a phonecard and pen and paper at the ready when you begin your telephone search.
7.
Make sure you have sufficient money for a month's deposit when you begin your tour of inspection.
8.
Be satisfied with the answers to all the appropriate questions before parting with any money.
Check first with your college accommodation office or citizens advice bureau.
3 Students, teachers and other college staff
There is perhaps something to be said for the continued use of the term student from the motives that led the Greeks to call the Furies the Eumenides,"the kindly ones', in the hope that the use of a flattering name might induce them to live up to it.
G.L. Brooks, The Modern University (1965)
This chapter tries to do three things:
1.
To help you relate to your fellow students.
2.
To help you understand college teachers better.
3.
To tell you something about the work of other college staff.
STUDENTS: IT TAKES ALL KINDS
In your first days at college, you'll rub shoulders with many other students — and you won't always find it easy to relate to them.
Who are  all these shy/brash, so much younger/older, so much brighter/duller, so much better/worse-dressed students?
How do you relate to them?
Let's look at some typical groups of college students in Britain.
In earlier decades — say, from the 1950s to the 1970s — most but not all college students were secondary school-leavers — now called"traditional students' because they arrive at college via the traditional route from school.
But there was nearly always a small group of so-called"mature students', who had failed to get to college when they left school (due to illness, perhaps, or economic circumstances or the disruption caused by the Second World War of 1939–45).
Today there are many more such"mature students'.
What are they doing at college in their thirties and forties — or even their fifties?
Very few colleges these days refuse admission on grounds of age alone.
Entry is normally open to all who can demonstrate a capacity to keep up with the courses and to benefit from such study, regardless of age or background.
College was never designed exclusively for younger students — though they generally constitute the largest single group.
Colleges welcome mature students for two reasons.
First, because human curiosity is insatiable.
The capacity for intellectual and psychological growth through learning goes on throughout life.
Mature students bring their whole life experience to college, they have potentially much to gain — and, therefore, much to offer the communities to which they return after college.
The age barriers to college entry are now rapidly crumbling, giving place to a policy of open access — which means college admission to students of all ages who can demonstrate their capacity to benefit from study.
Second, the majority of those studying at British colleges are so-called"home students', which includes students from other European countries (or more accurately, from countries within the membership of the European Economic Community).
But there are nearly always some overseas students — mostly from Africa or Asia but including some from America or even Australasia.
What are they doing here?
Some will be privately funded (i.e. paying their own way or grant aided by independent foundations).
Some will be scholarship holders, sent abroad to study by their own governments in order to Increase the supply of educated, trained and skilled people in their home economies.
For that reason, the majority are likely to be studying technical or vocational subjects that equip them with more immediately useful skills.
Others will be following more conventional, academic types of college courses.
Another general observation worth making is that, whereas in the past the majority of students at British colleges were likely to be male (except perhaps on specialized vocational courses such as fashion  design, hairdressing or nursing), higher and further education in Britain now attracts almost equal numbers of men and women students.
The admission policy of most colleges reflects the rough numerical balance of men and women in the wider community.
Although this means that student groups are more evenly balanced by gender than was the case with earlier generations of students, men still outnumber women in so-called "traditional" male subjects such as maths, engineering and applied science.
(See the annual reports of the Equal Opportunities Commission, the body responsible for promoting equality between the sexes, which monitors and analyses the proportion of men and women entering higher and further education courses.)
Whether they are men or women, from home or overseas, of the traditional or mature variety, students conform to no single model but reflect the widest variety of human types.
Don't imagine for one moment that most college students are intellectual"egg-heads' — and that you are the exception.
In any representative sample of students, there will be a statistically small number of highly intelligent students.
Most students, by definition, will be of average ability, with a smaller number below average.
But assessed differences in the abilities of students at college admission are notoriously unreliable predictors to performance because so much depends on personality, on character and on "intelligence in action" — that is, the active use to which students put their intellectual capacities.
So, be prepared for some close encounters with interesting students of all kinds.
But don't expect your fellow students to constitute a representative cross-section of the community at large— if only because they contain an above-average proportion of younger people and others who are most able to sustain continuous study and to benefit from college education.
WHAT ABOUT COLLEGE TEACHERS?
ARE THEY REALLY HUMAN?
Because they lead somewhat unusual lives, college teachers are often subjected to this type of elaborate caricature.
The popular image of the absent-minded, long-haired professor may have given way in recent years to the well-suited, urbane telly-don, but college teachers are still often represented as colourful, eccentric and even controversial figures: exotic creatures, trapped in a forlorn struggle between an unfeeling college bureaucracy on the one hand and an unthinking — nay, an invincible — student ignorance on the other.
The reality is less dramatic, more complex, more fascinating.
College teachers comprise a richly-varied tribe.
Think, for example, of the ineffectual Oxbridge dons portrayed by Evelyn Waugh in Brideshead Revisited; the miscreant, Welsh, history teacher, Jim Dixon, in Kingsley Amis's Lucky Jim; the snooty but endearing Professor Higgins in George Bernard Shaw's Pygmalion, transferred to the screen as My Fair Lady; Albert Corde, the Chicago college dean, stranded in Bucharest, in Saul Bellow's The Dean's December; Henry Wilt, the polytechnic English lecturer, dinning"Eng.
Lit"into the unreceptive skulls of rude mechanicals in Tom Sharpe's Wilt; Dr Petworth, the luckless linguist in Malcolm Bradbury's Rates of Exchange — a practised cultural traveller — an academic like Norman Macaig's — styleless, white and male, forty and married, bourgeois and British.
Or the British academic, Philip Swallow and his American counterpart, Morris Zapp, in David Lodge's Changing Places — "academics on the move, in the air, on the make" — who have exchanged the plate-glass, concrete jungle of Euphoria State University, USA, for the damp, red-brick University of Rummidge, UK; or the  unworldly dons of the 1987 television series, Porterhouse Blue.
One explanation for all this brilliant caricaturing of college teachers might be that they really are larger than life, as portrayed.
Or could it simply be that many of our best satirical writers were themselves college lecturers?
After all, not many business executives or lawyers write satirical novels or plays about their own profession.
(John Mortimer may be the exception that proves the rule.)
Apart from a small number of mature entrants to the profession, most college teachers are drawn direct from the ranks of successful former students.
This does not mean that they are eminent all scholars (a term reserved for a handful of rare spirits — like Albert Einstein, Bertrand Russell and others — who have shattered the frontiers of human knowledge, earning world-wide distinction by their intellectual endeavours).
Most college teachers are more down-to-earth: solid citizens and safe, intellectual craft workers, who mostly know and love their subject well enough to wish to share their enthusiasm for it with their students.
Every college teacher in Britain will be a graduate and most will have acquired some higher qualification (e.g. a master's degree or a doctorate of philosophy) by extended study and examination.
But this does not necessarily or even generally mean that every college teacher can teach.
Few will have attended a course in pedagogy — the art and science of educational methods.
A few college teachers are undoubtedly brilliant exponents of their subject.
Others may be outstanding researchers or prolific academic authors.
But you should not assume that college teachers are all professionally-trained teachers.
Experience will quickly show they're not!
College teachers may have unusual contracts of employment that means they often work irregular hours.
Everybody knows that college teachers have long holidays, but few people appreciate the variety or intensity of the demands made on college teachers.
In addition to their normal teaching duties, many college teachers will teach evening-class students, which means they may not be back at college until late the following day.
Nearly all college teachers also have a contractual obligation to research and to publish; to carry their share of departmental and/or college administration; to serve on college committees and other policy-making or advisory bodies; to set and to mark college examinations; to be available to help students whenever possible; and so on.
Because they live busy academic lives, college teachers are not always available just when you want to see them.
Many teachers display a notice outside their college doors, advising students of their regular hours for "consultation without appointment" .
Others will normally have made arrangements with the departmental secretary for seeing students by appointment.
If you chance to meet your college  teachers when crossing the campus but they don't stop to talk to you, don't take offence.
They are quite likely to be moving rapidly from one lecture hall to another in consecutive hours.
So, please don't assume that teachers have nothing else to do but give lectures and await your arrival in their rooms.
A few other things are worth noting about the life-style of college teachers.
They tend to dress for comfort and convenience rather than to impress.
At Oxbridge and some other colleges, teaching staff may wear academic gowns (though not academic headgear, except at ceremonial occasions).
At other colleges, some professors and other senior (i.e. better-paid) academic staff may wear collars and ties with more formal suits.
But the majority of college teachers, both men and women, dress informally, in keeping with long.standing academic tradition.
Academic staff are voracious readers and inveterate talkers.
This helps them to keep up with their subject and sometimes with their colleagues.
They are often to be seen engaged in passionate argument and vociferous debate.
This is the very stuff of college life.
It takes place all the time and should not be confused with organizational politicking (which generally takes place behind closed doors) or personal vituperation (which generally takes place in committee rooms).
With the academic thirst for knowledge goes the academic's well-publicized thirst for alcoholic refreshment.
This is hardly surprising amongst members of a profession who earn a good deal of their living by talking.
But alcoholism is a lesser occupational hazard amongst academics than it is amongst, say, media people, advertising agents or lawyers.
The appreciation of fine wine and the appreciation of fine intellectual distinctions often go together.
And because they are mostly sociable creatures, academics enjoy slaking their thirst in the senior common room, in campus bars and off-campus pubs.
They will be seen partaking of hospitality at college wine-and-cheese parties, at welcoming sherry receptions, at meetings of convocation and examination boards, at end-of-term wind-up parties and graduation celebrations.
However, the fact that students and academics share a taste for informal dress and for the occasional drink should not mislead you into thinking that students and academic staff are equals.
That's an unwarranted assumption — for all college teachers are in a position of academic authority.
That's to say, as well as teaching and helping students learn, college teachers may also have some formal responsibility for student behaviour and discipline.
So, whilst they may encourage an atmosphere of informal comradeship and sociable learning, college teachers are not your equals and you should not  expect them to treat you as such.
If in doubt, play safe — at least initially.
Use first names only when invited to do so.
OTHER COLLEGE STAFF: WHAT DO THEY DO?
First come I; my name is Jowett.
There's no knowledge but I know it.
I am the Master of the College.
What I don't know isn't knowledge.
H.C.Beeching, The Masque of Balliol
Besides college teachers, you'll come into contact with some other important members of college staff.
It's worth knowing who they are and what they do.
Let's make our way through the organization chart of an imaginary college.
At the top, there's the university vice-chancellor (principal, director or master in the case of a college).
He or she is the chief executive with overall responsibility for running the institution.
In most universities, he or she is often called the vice-chancellor — the title "chancellor" being reserved for another notable figure who fills that largely ceremonial and dignified office.
(Note that most heads of colleges and vice-chancellors in Britain are still men — even though chancellors include some very distinguished women.)
The typical British college head is supported by a team comprising several principal officers:
1.
The academic registrar The academic registrar is a full-time administrator, responsible for all matters academic — from the appointment of academic staff to the admission of students, from college statutes and rules to formal relationships between the college and its principal funding authorities.
The academic registrar is normally a legally-qualified person who advises the principal at meetings of the major academic decision-making body (sometimes called "senate" ).
Overall responsibility for college policy usually rests with the college court.
2.
The bursar The bursar is another full-time administrator, responsible for all matters relating to college funding and the control of college financial expenditures.
The bursar's staff normally administer academic and other staff salaries as well as student grants and loans.
Bursars these days wear permanently-worried expressions because they are chiefly pre-occupied with the financial income and expenditure.
With current British government policy of  reduced funding for colleges of higher and further education, the bursar's staff spend much of their time these days in trying to find ways of balancing the college's books by reducing overspending in order to restore financial viability and so preserve college existence.
3.
The librarian The librarian is what might today be called the college's chief information scientist — responsible for the policy and running of one of the college's principal physical assets — its information base, contained in books, journals, computer and microfiche stores and archives.
With the phenomenal explosion of information science in recent years, the vast increase in publishing costs and the reduction in government grants to educational establishments, librarians seem to spend a great deal of their time these days poring over computer print-outs on library utilization, in order to help them decide where to recommend cutbacks in library service (e. g. shorter opening hours or reduced service from enquiry desks).
4.
Deans At collegiate institutions, like Oxbridge, colleges normally appoint a dean of undergraduates, responsible for carrying out college policy on all matters relating to undergraduates.
At other, more unified institutions, both universities and polytechnics, the dean will be the person with overall responsibility for administration within a particular faculty (e.g. science, engineering, arts and social studies, business, and so on).
Each of these principal officers will have a deputy (e.g. vice-dean) and a group of qualified staff specialists to help them administer college affairs.
Whether or not you think you'll ever need to use their services (see Chapter 21 on where to go for advice and help), it's important to get to know who they are and what they do.
For example, the librarian will certainly have qualified and trained staff to help you get the best out of the library's resources (see Chapter 8 on more effective reading).
Then there's usually a student (or undergraduate) registry that looks after college admissions, examinations, records, timetables and so on.
Sooner or later, you'll be paying them a visit (see Chapter 4 on choosing subjects and class options).
Then there's the student advisory service or welfare office (names vary from college to college), responsible for helping students with a range of services from accommodation (see Chapter 2 on accommodation) and student health (see Chapter 18 on managing stress) to careers counselling (see Chapter 22 on career choice and job search) and alumni relations (see the final chapter, So, what did you get out of college?).
Finally, it's worth noting that most colleges have an extensive range of services offered by the college or student union.
These are run independently of college authorities (although they may be supported and encouraged by them).
So, if you need a sympathetic ear or advice on a problem you've failed to resolve with the relevant college office, it will often pay you to consult the student-union Office.
4 Choosing subjects and class options
This chapter tries to do three things:
1.
To examine the reasons for studying a particular subject.
2.
To discuss the choice of academic subjects.
3.
To suggest how best to make your class options.
REASONS FOR STUDYING PARTICULAR SUBJECTS
There are at least three good reasons for choosing to study a subject at college:
1.
Because you find the subject inherently interesting and therefore want to know more about it.
This often means that you've studied the subject at a lower level before coming to college — and have done reasonably well at it.
But you should not simply stick to subjects in which you did well at school.
Consider the whole range.
2.
Because the subject deals with some important aspects of the society in which you live and work and hope to earn your living.
It pays to equip yourself with an understanding of a society that will change so much in political, economic, social, scientific, technological and cultural terms during your own working lifetime.
The relevance of an academic subject to the non-academic, outside world is a useful guideline.
3.
Because the subject is practically useful and will stand you in good stead when you set out on your chosen career.
 "Vocational" subjects — like medicine, engineering, law or accountancy — prepare students more directly for their first jobs.
Other subjects — like maths, economics, material sciences or history — are less career-oriented and allow you more freedom to choose your career as your interests develop and labour markets change.
Finally, there are those subjects — like English, history and philosophy — which provide critical intellectual training of a kind that will prove invaluable, whatever you choose to do with the rest of your life.
HOW DO YOU CHOOSE WHICH SUBJECTS TO STUDY?
The first point is that you can't make a meaningful choice of subjects without adequate information.
If you're not sure which subjects to study, seek further information from the college registry or the subject department itself.
College staff are used to explaining their subjects to students, especially at the start of each academic session.
Many colleges organize an "electives fair" at which students are given a broad general introduction to subjects on offer during that session.
The second point is that you should certainly select subjects you think you will enjoy.
Consult your personal preferences and established interests.
Ask yourself two questions:
1.
Do I already know enough about this subject, as taught at this college?
The approach might be quite different from what you suppose.
Don't engage in self-deception.
Find out more before making your final choice.
2.
From what I already know, will I enjoy studying the subject for one, two or possibly more years?
If you devote several years of your life to a subject, you ought to be reasonably sure that you'll enjoy it.
And you'll certainly do better at subjects you enjoy, rather than those you feel you ought to do or are required to do.
The third point is to consider choosing subjects that help you make sense of your own society.
Most colleges offer a range of subjects that examine society from a critical and constructive viewpoint.
You are encouraged to question the world as it is and to ask how it might be better organized to meet individual and social needs and wants.
College students in the 1990s should have their eyes firmly fixed on the year 2000 and beyond.
Therefore, consider how your choice of subjects might help you prepare yourself for survival and success in the world of the twenty-first century.
The fourth point is to check whether your choice of a particular subject calls for any prior knowledge or qualification; or whether it carries with it the obligation to study a related subject.
For example, you may not be allowed to study, say, economics unless you also take statistics or computing.
Or there may be a prescribed test of mathematics before you can proceed to advanced mathematics, or a prescribed standard of attainment in maths before you can begin electrical engineering.
The fifth point is that you should keep an open mind about your choice of subjects and be willing to change your subject choice before you become too emotionally committed.
Most colleges will allow students to change their subject choices in the early weeks of an academic session.
Thereafter, you may find it very difficult or impossible to change — because you will by then have missed so much of the introductory lectures and classes.
If in doubt, keep two provisional subjects going for the first half of the first term — and then drop the one that appeals to you the less.
HOW TO CHOOSE YOUR CLASS OPTIONS
When you've decided your field of study, you still need to make your class options (always assuming you're allowed any choice).
"Electives', as they're sometimes called, enable you to narrow your focus of study onto those specific subjects/classes that interest you the most.
For example, if you were a first-year student at the University of Strathclyde Business School in Glasgow, Scotland, you would have a very wide range of class options within the first year of your BA degree course.
The BA pass degree consists of thirteen classes (or their equivalent) taken over three years — five classes taken in the first year and usually four in each of the following two years.
Alternatively, it's possible to accumulate credits from each of the class options you choose.
Each class is given a credit rating (normally one credit per class, but some half-classes like Quantitative Methods or Computing, which are obligatory in the Business School, may carry only a half credit).
You'd then be able to choose between, say, Economics I, Business Law I, Accounting I, Industrial Relations I and so on.
The way you decide how to exercise your class options is by reading the class syllabus, published in the college prospectus (or undergraduate handbook), discussing the relative attractiveness and utility of the classes (and their teachers!) with second-year students, or your adviser of studies or with the teachers themselves — or with a combination of all these.
Most colleges have now gone over to the modular system of teaching, which means you can achieve your degree (or other qualification) by combining the study of those subjects, however dissimilar, which interest you the most.
Thus, you may take mathematics with music or politics with personnel management -both attractive combinations!
It cannot be too highly stressed that nobody else can exercise your subject/class choice but you.
It therefore pays to make the earliest and fullest possible enquiries before exercising your option choice.
In that way, you minimize the risk of making a poor choice and a false start in your first year, with the consequent possibility of having to catch up by taking extra classes or to repeat classes the following year.
5 Managing your time at college
After rising and saying his prayers, the poet should retire to his study and…engage in the study of the ancillary sciences: lexicography, metrics and so forth The second quarter of the day should be devoted to poetic composition…
Then, in the last part of the day, he should revise what he has composed in the morning…
After evening prayers, a fair copy should be made of the day's composition…
The second and third quarters of the night are to be devoted to sleep.
Raja-Shikara, Prescription for the Way of Life a Poet should Follow (tenth century AD)
This chapter tries to do three things:
1.
To introduce the concept of time management.
2.
To help you practise better time management.
3.
To suggest some useful points in managing time.
THE CONCEPT OF TIME MANAGEMENT
The secret of survival and success at college can be very largely defined in terms of how well you organize your time.
In schools, factories and workshops, somebody else prescribes how you should spend your time — and checks that you don't abuse the timetable.
At college, the responsibility for how you use your time is handed back to you.
You become, to that extent, a potentially more autonomous individual.
You have much greater freedom of choice how you spend your time -but that freedom also confers greater responsibility on you.
Survival means continuity through time…and success means making the best of your opportunities within a given time-frame.
You can't succeed if you don't survive.
So, survival needs come first.
What are those needs?
How do they fit into our total human needs, in rough order, from lower to higher order needs?
(Note that we speak here of needs, not wants!)
1.
Oxygen — without which we quickly die as living organisms.
2.
Food and drink — without which our bodies soon lose their efficiency.
3.
Warmth and shelter — without which we feel uncomfortable and distressed.
4.
Human society — without which we remain atomistic individuals, isolated and alone.
5.
Physical activity — without which we feel deprived of our most human attributes.
6.
Mental stimulation — of which college studying should provide an abundance.
Given that these survival needs are common to all humans, we vary greatly in the quantity and timing of those needs.
Some of us have a lower threshold of boredom; some have a better physical metabolism; others have a lower resistance to cold; and so on.
The time we spend attending to these individual needs is bound to vary somewhat.
That's why it's impossible to be prescriptive about how you should allocate your own time — and that's why it's essential that you learn how best to manage your time for yourself.
HOW TO PRACTISE BETTER TIME MANAGEMENT
Time as a scarce resource
You need to come to terms with the fact that whilst time is objectively finite and inelastic, you know from personal experience  that time can seem highly elastic.
Think how time flies in periods of intense, purposeful activity.
Then compare periods of skull.numbing, unrewarding boredom or inactivity.
So, time is your most scarce and valuable resource especially in examinations.
Getting organized
You need to organize your life if you are to make the most of your limited time at college.
You'll find certain external time demands are made on you.
For example, you must attend certain lectures and tutorials; you must present assignments by prescribed dates; you must complete a course of study within a given number of years.
Those external demands provide a time-frame within which you must organize the rest of your activities and focus your attention.
Your academic course
You should begin by focusing your attention on your academic course as a whole.
How many years will it take to complete the course by full-time study?
Can you switch to part-time study, if necessary?
Is there a qualifying period before you can present yourself for examination?
What combination of subjects is mandatory or recommended?
The academic session
You should then focus on one academic session, normally much less than a full twelve-month period.
How much of your time will you devote to study during academic terms?
How much will be devoted to other demands — home, family, paid employment perhaps?
How will you spend the academic vacations?
Not the same as holidays!
This might be the best time to get that extra reading done; to work on a project report; to earn spare cash; or to attend to non-urgent domestic responsibilities.
The syllabus
Next, focus carefully on the syllabus for each class, noting key sub-divisions and the proportion of the session devoted to each.
For example, if you have to undertake practical work (e.g. placement with an organization) as part of your course, who obtains that placement and how closely does it have to fit in with academic training?
The college term
Focus next on the college term (or semester).
How many weeks does it comprise?
What significant event(s) mark the end of that term (e.g. examinations)?
You should make yourself a simple planning diary of the weeks of the term, boldly marking key weeks and dates.
This  planning diary should show, for example, weeks in which certain lecture courses begin or in which certain work assignments are due for presentation; weeks in which there are social or sporting events; weeks in which you are free to take a break or to go away for a few days.
SOME USEFUL POINTS IN TIME MANAGEMENT
1.
You need to develop a weekly timetable, covering all your waking hours — between, say, 7 am and midnight, including weekends.
Begin by deciding how many hours sleep you expect to need throughout the week.
Block in those hours as sacrosanct.
Remember, if you go to a late-night party, you'll need to make up those lost hours of sleep — probably at week-ends.
2.
Then, block in all lecture, tutorial or seminar hours.
These are hours when you know you need to be somewhere on time — so build in margins for travel.
3.
Next, allow adequate times for refreshment — both meal-times and snacks and short periods of physical exercise and fresh air.
It's a good idea to block in regular periods of exercise.
That way you keep yourself physically fit for mental activity.
4.
Finally, you are left with unallocated time which you must distribute equitably between your different subjects, in line with your known study patterns — and leisure activities.
If, for example, you have two lectures a week in a particular subject — say, on Tuesday and Thursday mornings — and a weekly tutorial — say, on Tuesday afternoons — then you should set aside regular time(s) — say, an hour or two on a Monday and another hour on, say, a Thursday — to study to and prepare for that class.
Ditto for other classes.
Your planning diary and your weekly timetable are simply management tools — they work for you, not the other way round.
In other words, by planning and timetabling, you organize your present time in order to have future time.
In that way, you can take time out of timetable for that unexpected event — the party invitation or concert or visiting speaker — without disturbing your study for survival and success.
There's much more to effective time management.
To succeed, you must meet your deadlines.
If you fail to complete assignments on time, you may lose marks, credits, or be required to repeat some courses.
A Research Dissertation which is late may result in your being unable to   graduate for a further year.
Learn to adjust your priorities as earlier assignments are completed and new ones taken on.
Don't procrastinate — make a start on each project as soon as possible.
6 Developing good Study Habits
This chapter tries to do three things:
1.
To explain the importance of good study habits.
2.
To suggest some of the best ways to study.
3.
To point out what is meant by effective study.
The Importance Of Good Study Habits
Human beings are said to be slaves of habit.
Hoe many of us could 7  survive for long without some predictable pattern or regularity in our lives?
Yet we also need stimulating change and variety.
Habitual activity gives our lives an element of security — the daily pattern of eating, sleeping, ablution and exercise — which provides the essential framework within which we can then be adventurous, taking some risk, enjoying the stimulation of the new and exciting.
To survive and succeed as a student, you'll need to develop your own pattern of regular activity, within which you can feel secure and become an effective student, leaving yourself sufficient freedom to be spontaneous, to be yourself.
It's difficult to exaggerate the importance of developing good study habits, yet it's impossible to prescribe any one, single set of study habits for all students.
The reason for this is that students are not a homogeneous category.
Successful students study in a variety of different ways, most of them equally valid and effective — so it would be presumptuous or simply wrong to recommend any one proven pattern of study ha bits and tell all students to conform to that pattern.
Instead, we urge you to get to know which particular pattern suits your personal needs — to record, analyse and, if necessary, to adapt that pattern in ways we shall suggest — and then to stick to it.
For example, if you play sport regularly — say, on Wednesday and Saturday afternoons — it's important that you eat and rest sensibly before your game, in order to be in top form and play your best.
Similarly, if you have a regular tutorial at say, 11 am each Tuesday, it makes sense to set aside some part of Monday to prepare yourself for the Tuesday tutorial (see Chapters on managing your time at college).
Lets assume you've worked out your timetable for the term/ semester.
How should you get down to your actual studies?
Experience suggests there's no better recipe for successful study than regular, patterned activity.
Patterns provide predictability — and predictability offers a measure of security and confidence.
WHAT'S THE BEST WAY TO STUDY?
Where you study is the first important step towards survival and success as a student.
Just as you know you must be in certain lecture halls for certain regular lectures, so you need to know where you should be for other forms of study.
What you need is a quiet, reasonably warm and well-lit room and a comfortable (not too comfortable!) chair and a table or desk to work at.
If you're lucky enough to live at home, or you have your own room in college or good lodgings, you may prefer to study there (see also Chapter 2 on accommodation).
But most students will spend much of their time working in the college library, study centre or some other  room set aside for quiet study (i.e. not the refectory or student union).
Where you study matters for four reasons:
1.
You settle down more quickly in a place you know rather than a new place where you need time to get used to the seating, the lighting, the visual distractions.
2.
You associate that place with a particular set of activities, so that returning to that place reinforces your mental concentration and allows you to work better.
3.
You spend less time searching for a place to work and more time actually working.
It's amazing how much time can be spent getting down to work — without actually doing any!
4.
You can be more easily found by your friends if you have a settled place of work.
So they spend less time searching for you and more time in your company.
The place itself should be conducive to study without being too comfortable.
Your mental concentration is reduced by too much physical well-being.
An armchair by the fire in winter may be the ideal spot for reading a novel: however, it's not the best place to structure or write an essay on "Newtonian thermodynamics' or" Political and philosophical influences on the novels of Jane Austen".
You should aim to avoid every kind of distraction that takes your mind away from your work.
Visual distraction
Visual distraction may be the easiest to contend with.
Many libraries offer study places, separated by physical dividers to cut down visual distractions, or, better still, carrels (partly-enclosed study cells) that cut out both visual and aural distractions.
Elsewhere, choose a seat facing a blank wall, rather than one facing a pinboard with pictures, recipes, messages and other seductive images.
A single, familiar image (e.g. a favourite photograph) may be reassuring and even inspirational.
Eye-strain
Eye-strain is another powerful visual distraction.
There are two sources: physical and psychological.
Any form of stress may produce headaches, eye-strain and tiredness (see Chapter 18 on managing stress).
However, the physical cause may simply be poor lighting: too little, too much, from the wrong angle or of the wrong colour.
An ideal gift for any student is an adjustable desk lamp, the more flexible the better.
If the physical lighting is acceptable, and the eye-strain persists, consult your medical practitioner or an ophthalmic optician.
Don't strain your eyes by putting up with poor lighting.
Noise and vibration
Noise and vibration of any kind is a powerful distraction — but words are more distracting than music.
Many students say they can't work effectively without some favourite background music (this chapter 15 being drafted to the background of a Mozart quartet — the perfect inspiration!).
Of course, that's a matter of taste.
But if workmen are hammering outside your door, if the noise is intermittent and/or high-pitched, if you can't switch it off at will, you may find such noise psychologically distressing as well as distracting.
If your next-door neighbours insist on blasting you at all hours with Wagner's Gottedammerung", be thankful: it might have been Heavy Metal.
Don't retaliate.
First, try reasoning with them.
Then, seek the support of other students who are similarly distracted.
Finally, take the matter up with the accommodation authorities (see Chapter 2 on accommodation).
Don't allow noise to distract you from your work — or rob you of sound sleep.
Start the way you intend to continue.
Are you sitting comfortably?
The "fundamental" principle of education is that the head can only take what the seat can take.
Your chair needs to support your spine, cushion your bottom and be at a convenient height for writing — but it does not need to be upholstered or to swivel or to have a head/footrest or whatever.
Find a chair that suits your needs and stick to it.
Once more, the familiar is comfortable and supportive, but don't neglect to get up and walk around the building — or better still, around the block — from time to time , to stimulate the supply of oxygen to the brain.
Or try working in a standing position.
Smells and odours
Smells and odours may be the most powerful single distraction of all — especially if they're delicious cooking smells — because they're the most pervasive and difficult to deal with.
If you have overseas students in the room below who cook curry at all hours, you really have only two choices: learn to enjoy curry or try to get a room change.
If neither solution is practical, try burning a joss-stick or invest in a large aerosol spray.
Finally, amongst the physical prerequisites for effective study, you need a place to study that is warm without being soporific, well-ventilated without being windswept, fresh without being frozen.
An air-conditioned library, laboratory or computer suite is ideal.
Failing that, a large room with a high ceiling is better than a cupboard.
But the most important requirement is a window that opens, with blinds or curtains that may be drawn against summer sun or winter blasts.
WHEN TO STUDY EFFECTIVELY?
When you choose to study is your own decision.
How you make that decision is critical to your survival and success as a student.
A student's life is ruled by the clock: there's a time to be up and about if you want breakfast; a time to be in college for a lecture or tutorial; a time by which you must hand in an essay or project report; a time to study and a time to relax.
We begin, as usual, with you — and with self-knowledge.
What's your temperament and life-style?
Are you a "dawn raider" or a "midnight cowboy" ?
Do you come alive slowly in the mornings or do you leap out of bed searching for a pencil to capture your best thoughts?
We're all different — and yet there are some sound guidelines from which we can all learn:
1.
Self-knowledge is a cardinal virtue.
Students are often slow to recognize their own best study times.
We need to think about ourselves as well-functioning organisms without becoming too self-conscious, inhibited or paralysed by morbid introspection.
2.
A few students find they think more clearly and creatively after early morning tea/coffee and before breakfast.
Others need to raise their blood sugar levels before they get any ideas.
Some of us are more mentally productive before midday; others only come to life in the second half of the day.
Still others do their best work when most of us have gone to sleep.
3.
Just as there's no one best study pattern for all students, so there are no set times of the day for different types of study.
Skimming a chapter for its main ideas may be done over coffee.
Structuring a complex essay may demand total, uninterrupted concentration for an hour or more before lunch.
Taking notes in the library may be spread over an afternoon.
4.
Get to know when you are at your best for different types of study and try to do them when you know you're at your best.
Your work won't always fit into these ideal time slots, but at least you'll know why you're less productive at other times.
5.
Watch out for tell-tale signs of fatigue and stress.
There will be times when you simply can't work effectively at all.
In that case, you might as well pack up your books and take some moderately energetic exercise — which is usually more therapeutic than brooding over your mental blockage.
6.
Try to increase your attention span and extend the length of time over which you can work effectively.
Study your own body chemistry.
Discover how and when and why you tire physically and mentally.
Most healthy adults in the West seem to require  food at four-hourly intervals and fluid refreshment at two-hourly intervals.
But there are considerable individual variations.
Find out how often your own body needs to replenish its energy stores.
And pay closer attention to understanding what your body is telling you about yourself.
WHAT IS EFFECTIVE STUDY?
Efficiency (or productivity) is an economic concept — a measure of relative outputs for given inputs, of time or energy or effort.
Effectiveness, by contrast, is not about relative performance but about achieving pre-set targets or objectives.
Effective study does not mean reading twice as fast (one measure of efficiency) or writing twice as much in a given time period (another measure of output over input).
Effective study implies some deeper reflection about overall educational objectives as well as the structure and content of human learning.
Research evidence shows that, whilst human adults vary greatly in their intellectual curiosity and their levels of mental energy, most of us learn by the unconscious process of internalizing knowledge, skills or attitudes that have a more-or-less permanent effect on our subsequent behaviour.
Of course, we may forget old lessons and we certainly need to keep in practice to maintain our performance levels in certain types of skill (especially psycho-motor skills — like playing a musical instrument or carrying out a laboratory procedure).
Research evidence also shows that learning is of two qualitatively different kinds:
1.
Shallow or superficial learning — like learning a name, address and telephone number that you promptly forget unless you write them down or consciously commit them to memory or use them habitually.
2.
Deep learning — like knowing how to dress yourself or clean your teeth or ride a bicycle, which you learned to do when young and which have entered your consciousness at a deeper level so that you rarely think consciously about them because you engage in these activities daily and apparently intuitively.
All too often, students engage in study that only results in shallow or superficial learning of the first type — for example, the rote learning of names, dates, superficial factual data and characteristics that you hold in your short-term memory just long enough to pass an examination and that are then rapidly forgotten, because they have not been internalized — perhaps because our psyches know they are not of much  use in the long run.
Our psyches are simply refusing to be overloaded.
Deep learning, on the other hand, is the kind you take with you through the rest of your life: like Paul of Tarsus's conversion on the road to Damascus, or the kind of insights vouchsafed to Jean-Jacques Rousseau when he fell asleep under his tree of knowledge.
When you know something like that, you have absorbed it so deeply into your consciousness that it is never likely to be displaced, except perhaps by brain-washing or frontal lobotomy.
Priorities
Priorities are your next task.
You must keep up with the full range of your subjects — but where do you begin?
There's always a strong temptation to put off the most difficult task or the least congenial subject.
Resist that temptation by turning it on its head.
Tackle your most difficult assignments first!
You must avoid negative study habits — like telling yourself you'll begin that essay when you've taken notes from one more book.
And then, just one more.
Begin to structure your ideas today — and then decide whether you need to do more reading.
Make a start!
Once you've settled you priorities, don't keep finding reasons (i.e. excuses) for not starting just yet.
There's nearly always something else you could do, rather than study.
Try making a "clean start" — say, on the hour — and don't give up until you've completed a reasonable work stint.
Regular breaks for exercise and oxygen are good; frequent interruptions are bad — because you waste time re-focusing on your subject-matter after each interruption.
Set yourself realistic (i.e. attainable) targets
If you set over-ambitious targets ( "I'm going to finish this assignment tonight — even if it kills me!" ) and fail to achieve them, you simply reinforce your sense of guilt and failure.
What you need to do is the exact opposite: set yourself targets that you can reasonably expect to achieve.
Then, enjoy a sense of achievement — feel good about yourself, reward yourself in some way (a cup of tea /coffee, perhaps, or even a night off).
After a break, you should feel energetic and confident enough to tackle another assignment.
Don't be too hard on yourself
Think clearly about your objectives: what precisely do you want to do?
Write down your objectives, it helps you concentrate.
Having clarified your objectives, and provided yourself with the necessary resources, make a start.
And recognize your achievements, however modest.
If you begin to punish yourself mentally (or even physically — for example, by denying yourself that reward), you simply add to your own anxieties, reduce your performance standards and damage your chances of survival and success.
SOME PITFALLS TO EFFECTIVE STUDY
Effortless superiority is a rare phenomenon amongst students who are, after all, only human like you and me.
The pursuit of excellence is quite another thing.
We can all learn to derive satisfaction from exerting ourselves, mentally and physically, to the utmost of our abilities in giving the best performance of which we're capable.
Then we can allow ourselves to feel subjectively good about the outcome, whatever our objective achievement.
Try to avoid flitting from academic twig to twig.
Give yourself sufficient time to get really stuck into your subject-matter.
But don't drive yourself into the ground.
In your first year, half an hour of concentrated thought on a specific topic may be as much as you can do at any one time.
But study stints that are too short will merely increase your anxiety.
Study, as we said at the outset, may be hard work but it should also be enjoyable.
Learn to share your enjoyment, as well as your problems and frustrations, with your fellow students — and your teachers, if you like.
You'll spend quite long periods of time working entirely alone, but study need not be an unsociable, let alone an anti-social, process.
To survive and succeed as a student you need to discover your own personal identity and your own ways of working — but you should also discover and enjoy the comradeship of your fellow students.
7 Getting the best out of lectures
There is no more agreement about what is a good lecture than there is about good music.
Indeed enquiries show that deferent individuals require not only different but conflicting things from a lecture.
Consequently, as most lecturers will be assessed at both extremes of a general rating scale, any lecturer will do well if he pleases half the audience.
Donald Bligh: What's the Use of Lectures (1971)
This chapter tries to do four things:
1.
To explain the purpose of lectures.
2.
To suggest how to get the best out of lectures.
3.
To explain how to take useful lecture notes.
4.
To suggest how to make the best use of those notes.
WHY HAVE LECTURES?
In earlier centuries, scholars sat at the feet of their university teachers who expounded the Bible and other classical texts in the form of readings — or"lectures'.
A college lecture is now something quite different from a reading.
Although many college teachers still have such job titles as lecturer, senior lecturer or reader, few teachers are happy reading aloud to their students for hours at a time.
And students soon demonstrate their boredom.
Instead, college teachers use the lecture for a variety of purposes:
1.
To arouse student interest in the subject.
2.
To convey information, concepts, theories about the subject.
3.
To put forward their own sometimes controversial views.
4.
To suggest how students may deepen their knowledge.
It's extremely doubtful whether, in these days of computer technology, information is still best conveyed by means of lectures.
Yet, sad to relate, the majority of college lecturers probably still regard lectures as the primary means of getting information across to their students.
Why should this be so?
1.
Because the majority of college lecturers have become so familiar with lectures as the primary method of teaching, from their own student days, that they simply continue the tradition.
2.
Because the majority of college lecturers probably assume (perhaps correctly) that many of their students will not acquire sufficient information, concepts and theories about the subject, except by means of lectures.
3.
Because the majority of college lecturers have yet to be convinced that there are better ways of conveying information — e.g. by the use of video or computer — or are too lazy to investigate or to try them.
4.
Because the majority of college lecturers are probably afraid that they might lose their students if they abandoned lectures whilst the rest of their colleagues retained them as the primary teaching method.
5.
Because, deep down, the majority of college lecturers are probably frustrated actors who enjoy performing before a live audience and who, therefore, want to keep the academic lecture as a means of boosting their flagging egos.
Most college lecturers now have private doubts about the educational value of lectures.
Many will be familiar with Graham  Gibbs' Twenty Terrible Reasons for Lecturing or Donald Bligh's What's the Use of Lectures?(see Suggestions for further reading at the end of this chapter) and most will have been intellectually persuaded that they ought to give fewer, better lectures and devote their remaining teaching energies to small-group learning — i.e. tutorials and seminars.
Indeed, they would do so, if only they had the time or resources or if the entire teaching staff could agree to abandon lectures simultaneously.
Until then, students will have to put up with some poor lectures.
HOW DO YOU GET THE BEST OUT OF LECTURES?
By being there
The first, critical point is to be there — and on time.
At their first meeting with students likely to be taking their class, most teachers explain how the class will work (e.g. structure and content of syllabus, sequence of topics, suggested reading for each topic, times and place of meetings, etc.).
Lectures are often self-contained (i.e. one topic per lecture) but the benefit of lectures is cumulative.
Good lecturers will often make cross references to earlier lectures.
To get the most out of lectures, it pays to attend regularly.
Borrowing lecture notes is often a complete waste of time because you've missed the impact.
By hearing, listening and learning
How do you stay awake in soporific lecture?
With great difficulty!
But let's be generous.
Let's assume our lecturers are reasonably enthusiastic about their subjects.
We may still find our attention distracted by thoughts of home, family or whatever.
So, we need help to focus our attention.
1.
Get as close as you can (physically and mentally) to the lecturer and the lecture topic.
If you sit at the back of a lecture hall, you'll get less out of it than if you sit up front.
2.
Focus on the lecture topic even before the lecture begins.
Go over the topic in your mind, identifying what you already know and don't know about the topic.
3.
Maintain an open questioning attitude to what's being said.
Train one part of your mind to listen acutely whilst another part maintains a silent, critical dialogue with the lecturer — posing questions and noting marginal comments for later follow-up (Meaning?
Reasons?
Evidence?
Compare? etc.).
Active participation in lectures does five things:
1.
It increases our attention span.
2.
It helps us get at the meaning behind the lecturer's words.
3.
It sharpens our critical intelligence.
4.
It allows us to record the principal ideas, key concepts, competing explanatory theories and illustrations used.
5.
It enables us to retain much more of the lecture content.
Don't be surprised if you retain no more than half of what is said at your first lectures.
With time and practice, you'll capture much more.
Competent teachers try not to convey too many ideas during first lectures but increase the "density" of lectures over the first year.
TAKING USEFUL LECTURE NOTES
Taking notes is one of the best ways to stay alert and gain most from lectures, but how many notes and what sort?
Taking lecture notes demands a different technique from taking notes from the printed page (see Chapter 8 on more effective reading and Chapter 9 on taking notes from reading).
You can re-read a book — but a lecture is a unique event whose emotional impact can never be successfully reproduced, even by video-recording.
Students sometimes seek permission to record lectures: not a good idea, except perhaps in the case of some handicapped students.
You don't attend a lecture to record its content verbatim.
You go to be intellectually stimulated, to capture and retain its essence.
The best way to do that is through the lecture notes.
With practice, you can certainly capture the essential content of a lecture.
The skill of notetaking comprises six practical tasks:
1.
Concentrate on essentials Go for the main points of the lecture, not details.
Lecturers often give an overview at the start of a lecture and a summary at the end.
Watch out for these.
Take as few notes as possible but sufficient to enable you to recall and revise all the essential content — that is, the key ideas, concepts, theories, etc.
2.
Try to capture the architectural shape of the lecture Think of your notes as a skeleton or outline of the lecture you'll give to your fellow students who are absent.
Bring out the overall design, shape and sequence of the arguments deployed by the lecturer.
3.
Use bold capitals, headlines, sub-heads and underlining Provide  plenty of guideposts and signs to assist later retrieval and revision.
Distinguish major from minor points and provide plenty of light and shade.
4.
Jot down words and phrases, not whole sentences You haven't time to record exactly what's said (except for exact titles of books, etc.), so keep notes brief.
You can fill out your outline when you revise your notes for essays or exams.
Keep your notes clear and uncluttered.
Don't begrudge the cost of the paper!
5.
Use diagrams wherever possible You don't need to be a graphic artist.
Use blocks and circles to link trains of thought and to feature significant connections and relationships.
Use colour if you think it helps.
6.
Keep your notes legible Notes must be in a form in which they can serve you later.
Illegible notes are more trouble than they are worth.
You'll get little or no value from notes taken on scrappy paper, which can't be filed and retrieved at will or which are difficult to decipher.
You can train yourself to write faster and legibly.
Practise it!
The acid test is this: will you be able to read through your notes the next day and recapture the essential arguments used by the lecturer?
You'll never be asked to reproduce the whole of a lecture.
You may be asked to discuss intelligently the essential subject-matter of a lecture.
Too many notes simply obscure the overall shape and conceal the essential content of a lecture.
So, go for skeleton notes — and leave plenty of margins and space round your notes.
Don't begrudge the paper!
You'll find you'll need that space to write marginal notes (e.g. to make connections), to add queries and follow-up points when you come to reread your notes for revision purposes (see Chapter 13 on pass those exams — and stay human).
HOW TO MAKE THE BEST USE OF LECTURE NOTES
Research evidence shows that, just as student attention fades significantly during the course of a lecture, so the retention and recall of lecture material fades equally rapidly.
How can you make the best use of lecture notes?
1.
Read your notes within twenty-four hours By reading your notes, you reinforce learning and prevent too-rapid fading of lecture material.
Fill gaps, identify queries and note points for immediate follow up.
Remember to take up these queries in tutorials /seminars.
2.
File your notes at least weekly Even your best lecture notes are useless if you can't find them.
Develop an index of notes that really helps you locate notes quickly when preparing for tutorials, writing essays or revising for exams.
A simple, box filing-system is invaluable.
3.
Edit your notes every term Editing means re-reading, amending, cross-referencing and improving your notes by enriching their content.
Underline, use colour-coding for highlighting — do anything that makes your notes more lively, vivid and memorable.
8 More effective reading
We asked anyone who could do so to write a short statement about what the chapter was about.
The number who were able to tell us…was just one in a hundred-fifteen.
As a demonstration of purposelessness in the reading of 99-/o of freshmen, we found this impressive…
When we pointed the ending out to them, some said "You mean you can sometimes tell what a chapter is about by looking at the end" and others said "0 Lord, how many times have I been told!" 
William Perry,"Students' Use and Misuse of Reading Skills', Harvard Educational Review (1959)
This chapter tries to do three things:
1.
To help you find out where to start reading.
2.
To help you understand about different kinds of reading.
3.
To help you improve your reading skills.
WHERE TO START READING?
Most students say they enjoy reading.
Few have thought carefully about what "reading for a college degree or diploma" involves.
Reading for pleasure and reading for profitable study are not the same.
To survive and succeed at college, you must learn (1) what to read (2) how to read, and (3) how to take useful notes and then to make the best use of them (see Chapter 9 on taking notes from reading).
On first entering your college library, you may well feel daunted by the sight of so many books and journals.
Where do you begin?
Do not despair!
There is help at hand.
1.
Find out if the library runs a slide-tape presentation.
You should learn the lay-out of the library and discover how to use the catalogues, bibliographies, microfiches, on-line computer terminals and reference sections.
Most of these will carry instructions that are "user-friendly" .
But if you run into problems, make friends with the helpful staff at the enquiry desks.
2.
Don't be put off by the bewildering choice of reading.
You will be guided by your class teachers on what to read and where to begin.
Make sure you get a copy of the initial (and any supplementary) reading list(s) handed out at the first meeting with your class teachers.
3.
Buy the latest (preferably paperback) edition of the main recommended textbook for each course/class.
If you are in doubt about which textbook to buy, consult your class teacher — and watch the departmental notice boards for offers of second-hand books.
4.
Become familiar with the academic conventions for citing books and other readings, e.g.:
Friedman, Henry, and Meredeen, Sander, The Dynamics of Industrial Conflicts: Lessons from Ford, London: Croom Helm, 1980.
Lockyer, C.
J.,"How Tomorrow's Workforce Sees Management and Unions', Personnel Management, Vol. 14, No. 8, August 1982, pp. 42–4.
5.
Don't be afraid to ask for reading priorities.
Your class teacher may recommend specific chapters, extracts or articles for particular tutorial topics.
But don't expect to find the answers to all your questions in any one single text.
Learn to be eclectic — i.e. selective — but fairly singleminded in your pursuit of answers.
6.
Don't become frustrated if the particular book or journal you  want is not on the shelf where you'd expect to find it, just when you want it.
If you plan your reading well ahead of your tutorials or essay-writing deadline, you stand a better chance of getting hold of the books you want.
A book not in its correct place on the library shelf may be:
(a) in use in the library;(b) out on loan to another borrower;(c) misplaced on the shelves; or (d) missing and not yet replaced.
Self-help in these circumstances is an unqualified virtue, but do ask the library staff to help if you've repeatedly failed to find the text you're looking for.
Persevere in tracking down the text you want.
Make use of your municipal branch library; your inter-county library loan service; the departmental library, etc.
As a final resort, ask your class teachers whether they have a spare copy to lend you.
They can only say no.
If you borrow a book make sure you return it as soon as possible.
DIFFERENT KINDS OF READING
Contrary to popular belief, not all students know how to read when they first arrive at college.
Functional literacy (the ability to read) is one thing; learning how to get the most out of your college reading is quite another.
Yet the ability to read with attention, to increase your reading speed, to improve your comprehension, to assess critically the strengths of competing arguments and to take useful notes — these are all vitally important study skills.
In his book, Learn how to Study (see Suggestions for further reading at the end of this chapter), Derek Rowntree offers excellent advice on how to tackle a textbook.
He quotes the words of Francis Bacon in the sixteenth century: "Some books are to be tasted, others to be swallowed and some few to be chewed and digested." 
Rowntree adapts Bacon's advice in this way:
1.
Tasting — i.e. referring to isolated passages in the text.
2.
Swallowing — i.e. skimming lightly and rapidly through the whole text.
3.
Chewing and digesting — i.e. studying the whole of a text carefully with close attention.
HOW TO IMPROVE YOUR READING SKILLS
Having chosen a text, you must decide which method best suits your purpose.
The method recommended by Rowntree is S Q 3R — the initial letters of the first steps to better reading.
Used flexibly and intelligently, S Q 3R is an invaluable guide:
S — survey: tackle the whole before you tackle the detailed parts Surveying gives you the measure of the task before you.
Survey the book first, then the chapter, then the paragraph.
Pay special attention to:
1.
title page for edition and year of publication; 2. contents page for book's overall structure; 3. index for key entries and emphases; 4. chapter headings as signposts to detailed contents; 5. first and last chapters for aims and conclusions; 6. first and last paragraphs of each chapter for summaries; 7. section sub-headings for signposts on detailed arguments; and 8. first and last sentences of paragraphs for detailed arguments.
Q — question: never read without first having some questions in mind Questioning helps to keep your mind fresh and alert.
Think what you already know and what you now want to know.
Ask yourself:
1.
What does this author set out to do?
2.
What does he or she say that's new and interesting?
3.
What does he or she mean by what he or she says?
4.
Does what he or she says support/supplement/contradict what I already know or believe?
1R — read: never read passively but critically with full attention.
Don? t expect to understand everything at a first reading.
At a first reading:
1.
look for the main (and secondary) ideas; 2. get the general shape and subject-matter clear; and 3. don't attempt to take notes — or mark the page!
At a second reading:
1.
follow the detailed reasoning or argument; 2. note what you missed at the first reading; 3. if you own the book, you may mark key points; and 4. if you don't own the book, note key points.
(See Chapter 9 on taking notes from reading.)
2R — recall: check your understanding of what you've read Recall helps to sustain concentration when you read.
It helps to correct misunderstandings.
It keeps your reading active rather than passive.
Ask yourself:
1.
How much do I remember?
2.
How well did I understand?
3.
How much can I explain in my own words?
4.
Can I recall key points without rereading the text?
3R — review: a further viewing of the text to check your recall Review tells you how much you've really taken in.
Repeat the previous four steps — i.e.:
1.
Survey — check headings and summaries.
2.
Question — do new questions arise?
3.
Reread — have you missed anything important?
4.
Recall — fill gaps and correct faults in notes.
FASTER READING WITH BETTER COMPREHENSION
If you consistently practise the ideas offered in this chapter, you should get a lot more out of your reading.
You should read much faster with greater comprehension and greater retention.
Try these exercises to improve your reading skills:
1.
Pass your eyes faster over the page of print.
2.
Don't sub-vocalize the text — you'll still understand more.
3.
Time a standard page of text and practise faster reading.
4.
Avoid eye-strain and have your sight checked regularly.
9 Taking effective notes from reading
Students in the having mode of existence will…write down every word in their looseleaf notebook so that later on, they can memorise their notes and thus pass an examination.
But the content does not become part of their own individual system of thought, enriching and widening it…
Instead…each student has become the owner of a collection of statements made by somebody else (who had either created them or taken them over from another source).
Erich Fromm, To Have or To Be?(1976)
This chapter tries to do three things:
1.
To explain the importance of taking effective notes.
2.
To help you to take more effective notes.
3.
To suggest how to make the best use of your notes.
WHY TAKE NOTES?
According to B.F. Skinner, "Education is what survives when what has  been taught has been forgotten" ( "Education in 1984" , see Suggestions for further reading at the end of this chapter).
He was evidently not facing the college class and exams that you're facing!
A cynic might define education as the notes that survive after you pass (or fail) your exams.
Whichever view you take, good notes will help you to enjoy and to get the most out of your studies and to achieve a better degree result.
Note-taking encourages active learning and provides you with some written record of what you've been studying.
But notes must be well taken.
The backs of old envelopes may be good enough for shopping lists but scrappy notes are worse than none.
They simply increase your panic when you most need help.
Notes should therefore be taken in a consistent format that allows you the greatest flexibility when it comes to using them.
For example, a loose-leaf binder is better than an exercise book because you can shuffle and re-classify your notes for tutorials, essay-writing and later exam revision.
Students are often uncertain whether they are taking the right kind of notes to help them survive and succeed at college.
Here are some practical guidenotes to help you master this critical study skill.
HOW TO TAKE MORE EFFECTIVE NOTES
How much notetaking?
The aim should be to take brief, intelligible notes that will assist your recall of key points within the structure and sequence of the argument.
Most students take far too many notes.
You need as few words and symbols on your page as possible.
However, note-taking is a highly individual matter.
You must devise your own style, format, abbreviations, etc., for yourself.
What to note?
You need to capture the main ideas and the line of argument.
Go for the key points — the points that sustain the argument and help to clinch it.
The advice offered in Chapter 8 on more effective reading was that you should only begin to take notes after a first reading — when you've grasped the structure and got the gist of the topic being dealt with.
The same general advice holds good: concentrate on following the flow of the argument and jot down just the key points within a coherent structure.
Ideal notes take on the character of architecture — that is, they comprise a well-defined structure; they are capable of supporting and containing the burden to be later placed on them; and they are designed to last.
If your notes are well structured, you can nearly always fill in the decorative details later.
How best to structure your notes?
Europeans tend to structure their notes (and their thinking) in linear fashion — that is, from top to bottom and from left to right on the page.
There's nothing wrong with that, provided you leave sufficient margins to the left (for file bindings) and to the right (for later commentaries).
Good reading notes taken by a good student will approximate to the structure of the author's chapter, book or article — they will include all key points but will omit the more detailed points.
In his fascinating book, Use Your Head!
Tony Buzan recommends an exciting alternative approach to note-taking.
He argues that our brains do not work in straight lines.
So, instead of linear notes, he urges us to adopt the "starburst" approach to note-taking.
Buzan claims that this pattern of note-taking conforms more closely to the pattern of our thinking and is, therefore, more useful for later recall, for preparing tutorial questions or revising a topic for an exam.
This method may be more suitable for some subjects than for others — try it and see if it meets your needs.
Compare the examples of linear and starburst note-taking from lectures in Figures 9.1 and 9.2.
(The same two methods may be used to take notes from reading.)
If you've been used to linear note-taking for many years, you'll need to persevere with the Buzan method.
HOW TO MAKE THE BEST USE OF YOUR NOTES
Re-reading your notes
Having taken notes (in whichever format), you must learn how best to use them.
It's pointless to take notes and then put them away until exam revision.
You should first re-read your notes within twenty-four hours of having taken them.
That first re-reading reinforces the learning process and helps to fix the essential points in your memory.
As you re-read your notes, you should add further marginal comments to those taken during the lecture /tutorial (Meaning?
Evidence?
Compare/contrast, follow up, etc.).
Editing your notes
You should edit your notes, just as you might edit a computer file.
You need to make connections between notes taken from your recent reading and notes taken earlier.
Cross-reference the main ideas.
Compare and contrast different theories, viewpoints and illustrations.
In this way, you enrich your learning.
Filing your notes
You then need to devise a filing and retrieval system that allows you to find the notes on a given topic when.
you want them.
Try using any substantial cardboard box as a simple but effective filing cabinet.
Set up a simple card-index system to log your notes in and out.
Some students find it best to set aside a regular time each week (perhaps at the weekend) to file all the notes taken during the previous week.
Classifying your notes
You can classify and index your notes for later use by subject, author or likely use.
Most important, you can build up a collection of notes as part of your own library of books, newspaper cuttings, essays and other materials that you should find invaluable for tutorials, essays, projects and exam revision.
Don't throw anything away at this stage
There will come a time when you need to go through your notes and weed out what's no longer required.
But beware of over-hasty discarding of notes.
Keep your notes for at least a full year — and probably for the whole length of the course.
You'll be surprised how often you need to refer back to earlier work.
In this way, nothing is wasted.
10 Getting the most out of tutorials/seminars
The (tutorial) system therefore counters perhaps the greatest enemy of intellectual progress amongst undergraduates: the passive collection of unanalysed material.
Far from being…a system that makes things easy…it is one that demands the greatest effort and initiative…but in such a way that is within reach of all.
J.P.
Corbett, in The Idea of a New University (ed.)
David Daiches (1964)
This chapter tries to do three things:
1.
To explain what purpose a tutorial I seminar serves.
2.
To recommend how best to prepare for tutorials.
3.
To help you get the most out of your tutorials.
WHY HAVE TUTORIALS?
A lecture course is often a passive form of learning: you listen acutely and take notes but are generally discouraged from asking questions or raising points because the size of the group inhibits fruitful exchanges.
By contrast, a tutorial group (or seminar) should be small enough to allow all its members to participate fully in the discussion.
At Oxford and some other colleges, a "Tutorial" is the name for weekly/fortnightly meeting with your tutor (sometimes shared with one or two other students) to read and discuss your written assignment.
Elsewhere a "tutorial" is simply the name for a small learning group.
Whatever its name, the tutorial or small learning group provides a uniquely-valuable opportunity to increase your understanding of any subject and to develop your skill in exchanging intellectual ideas.
So you should certainly learn to make the most of it.
The most important point to understand is that a tutorial is an opportunity to share in the learning process: to share your ideas, experience, understanding and perplexities.
That means there's no such thing as a "silly" question in a tutorial — provided it's relevant.
And there's no opting out: the price of admission to a tutorial is that every student shares in the discussion.
As the Americans say, "There's no free lunch!" 
HOW TO PREPARE FOR TUTORIALS
In most tutorial groups, in Arts, Social Science and Business students take it in turn to open the discussion.
Whether you've been asked to open the discussion or not, you should prepare yourself for the tutorial as follows:
1.
Think carefully about the meaning of the question(s) Questions may be  straightforward or they may be deliberately provocative.
Try to identify the heart of the matter the question is getting at.
Concentrate on that question and begin by asking yourself how much you already know about the question.
2.
Revise your lecture notes, if any, on the topic Try to relate the topic under discussion to what you've heard in lectures.
Use your lecture notes to help you identify what's essential and what's marginal to the question posed.
3.
Read and note as many of the recommended texts as possible Your tutor will guide you on what to read.
Try to gather a diversity of views, not just one approach to the question.
It's the clash or conflict of views that helps to illuminate the question.
4.
Identify what you know/understand — and what you don't Remember, there's no shame in admitting that you don't understand something you've read.
You could find yourself in greater difficulties later if you don't grasp basic concepts and ideas in the early stages of the class.
Don't be afraid to ask for help.
5.
List the key points you wish to raise for discussion To get help  with what you don't understand, list the points you want to raise in discussion.
Make sure you raise those points early in the tutorial.
Don't wait until the last few minutes; it may be too late.
Don't assume another student will ask your question.
6.
Try to relate this topic to earlier/later topics Tutorial topics rarely exist in a vacuum.
There is often a cluster of topics around a subject or theme.
Try to make relevant connections between different topics, both within and between your class subjects.
In Science, Engineering and Technology, tutorials are likely to be devoted to problem-solving.
You are usually given problems in advance, and will be asked to give your solutions and how you arrived at them.
HOW TO GET THE MOST OUT OF YOUR TUTORIALS
If you are asked to open the discussion
Most students feel nervous before opening any discussion.
It's the same for your fellow students.
And you get better with practice.
Here are some suggestions to help.
1.
Summarize your essential points on one page.
Just the essential points — not an essay!
2.
Say how you intend to approach) tackle the question.
3.
Provide some definition or clarification of your subject-matter.
4.
Utilize relevant concepts, alternative theories and perspectives.
5.
Present key facts, opinions, views, with source references.
6.
Tell us what you think.
Don't just recite what"Bloggs' says.
Note: Use black print on white paper to facilitate reproduction.
If possible, duplicate and distribute copies well in advance of the tutorial.
Don't begrudge the cost.
You'll acquire valuable revision notes.
Don't forget to include your tutor!
How to open the discussion
1.
Check that all members of the group have read your summary.
2.
Make a brief effective verbal presentation of your case.
3.
Concentrate on what you find interesting, provoking, perplexing.
4.
Say what you don't understand and ask the group for help.
5.
Pose questions you would like the group to discuss.
6.
Don't tell us all you know on the topic — that's boring!
7.
Don't read your paper — learn to improvise from notes or headings.
8.
Open up the topic for discussion — don't close it down!
9.
Don't exceed about ten minutes.
You'll be stopped after fifteen.
If you are not opening the discussion
This doesn't mean you can relax — not if you want to get the most out of your tutorials.
Your tutor may still call on you to give your own views.
Here's how you might prepare for these tutorials:
1.
Make sure you obtain and read the summary well in advance.
2.
Note the key points and questions you wish to raise for discussion.
3.
During the presentation, listen carefully and take brief notes.
4.
After the presentation, ask questions and express views.
Note: This does not mean monopolizing the tutorial with long speeches.
It does mean learning to cultivate the exchange of ideas and viewpoints.
Don't allow your attention to drift.
Stick with the discussion and offer your contribution to the group.
You'll get much more out of the tutorial and feel you "belong" , once you've become a regular contributing member of the learning group.
Rationale for the advice offered here
You only get out of a tutorial what you are prepared to put into it — plus a little bit more!
Your tutor is there as a resource and will keep things moving.
But it's up to you to play the major roles.
Remember, you may never get the same chance to try out your ideas — however half-baked — and still be treated kindly by your fellow students.
If you have an idea, let's hear it.
It may be brilliant — so it would be selfish not to share it with others.
If you don't understand something, say so — you'll be surprised how many others don't understand either!
Learn to overcome your shyness: it will stand you in good stead for the rest of your life.
Learn how to disagree with the arguments put forward by others without making them feel small.
Try to bring in relevant points from other courses and sources, including your personal experience.
The rationale for all this is:
1.
it prevents the group from becoming bored and frustrated; 2. it trains you to identify essentials and to avoid waffle; 3. it gives you practice in handling intellectual exchanges; 4. it increases your sensitivity to the feelings of others; 5. it helps you to "think on your feet" and gain self-confidence; 6. it assists you with later revision and exam techniques; and 7. it makes for better learning and it's more fun.
Having the last word
Whether or not you opened the discussion, you may be invited to have the last word.
Be ready to say what you believe you've learned from the  discussion.
Remember, a tutorial offers an opportunity for sociable learning: so learn to make the most of your tutorials by your participation.
Participation makes for better learning and makes that learning more enjoyable.
11 Better college writing
Some students think that all good writers come to their task in a well-organized fame of mind outline intact, computer ready.
Would that this were true.
Most writers go through a series of fumbling stages, groping for ideas, before they manage to sort them out and develop an organized plan.
Eventually they must develop that plan, of course, but the path way is crisscrossed with distracting side trails that can lead the writer astray.
Cavender and Weiss, Thinking/writing (1987)
This chapter tries to do three things:
1.
To help you understand what's meant by better college writing.
2.
To help you write your first essays.
3.
To help you improve your writing skills.
WHAT IS COLLEGE WRITING?
Writing forms an essential part of college work.
Most students enjoy reading, but dislike having to write.
Perhaps they've never been taught to write or how to handle criticism of their written work.
Whatever the reasons may be, the ability to express your own ideas clearly, logically and concisely is an important study skill to be developed.
Written work at college is generally of two kinds:(1) essays, reports or other written assignments;(2) examination answers.
In both areas, you need to learn how to communicate your ideas as effectively as possible through the written word — whether in handwritten, typed or word-processed form (see Chapter 13 on Pass those exams).
An essay in Arts, Social Science and Business is an intellectual exercise and an aesthetic challenge: you attempt to structure your thoughts and to express your own ideas on a particular topic or question in a concise, elegant and persuasive written form.
An essay tests your ability to analyse a given question, to develop a line of argument, to explain clearly what you mean and to express a point of view so as to persuade — if not always to convince — the reader of the strength of your case.
To be persuasive your meaning needs to be clear.
An essay in Science, Engineering or Technology may call for a survey of the literature on a specific topic.
It should provide a readable condensation of the recent literature: a critical appraisal, not a mere catalogue.
A report is similar to an essay but often contains an account of a discussion, the summary findings of a piece of research or of the literature on a given theme.
Drafting a Scientific Paper requires a more closely-prescribed format:
1.
Abstract — a concise summary
2.
Introduction — which places the work in a historical context and explains why it was thought important and worthwhile.
3.
Materials and Methods — which describes the experiment or procedures undertaken.
4.
Results — which states the experimental results obtained and provides illustrative examples.
5.
Discussion — which develops conclusions and incorporates them into the historical pattern of evolving knowledge, perhaps offering some conjectures but avoiding speculation.
WRITING YOUR FIRST ESSAYS
Careful preparation and consistently self-critical writing pay dividends.
Before you begin to write, prepare yourself as follows:
1.
Think carefully about the meaning of the question/subject posed The same question may admit to several different interpretations.
Move from the abstract to the concrete in your thinking.
Break large tasks down into smaller, more manageable parts.
You might begin by writing notes and questions to yourself — to check what you already know and where you need more information.
2.
Muster your resources You've unlikely to be stimulated by a blank sheet of paper.
You must learn to interact with your notes and other resources.
Don't lose sight of the time and space constraints.
Don't put off your writing until the last minute and then panic.
3.
Decide on an approach — how you intend to tackle the question Will you adopt the obvious approach or take an unorthodox line?
Experiment by all means — but keep a sense of proportion.
4.
Develop an appropriate structure/outline of your essay You may develop alternative structures and then combine them.
Check that your structure will give shape and coherence to your essay.
A good structure is one which:
(a) ensures that you cover all essential points;(b) provides a solid foundation on which to build your argument;(c) holds your argument together without undue strain;(d) offers sufficient scope to develop your argument; and (e) enables you to reach your conclusion.
One suggested essay structure might be as follows;
1.
Introduction — in which you say how you interpret the question and how you intend to tackle it.
You should establish your line of argument right at the outset.
2.
Section 1 — in which you present your principal arguments in clearly differentiated paragraphs.
3.
Section 2, 3, etc. — in which you develop your argument, offer supporting or qualifying evidence, cite relevant authorities and otherwise make your case convincing.
4.
Conclusion — in which you clinch the argument by threading together your earlier points, making your overall position unambiguously clear without tedious repetition A good conclusion emerges; it needs no super-glue.
The writing task
Here are some pointers on how to go about the writing task: 1.
Write a first draft of your essay.
Don't get "hung up" on your first sentence or paragraph; they're always the most difficult.
Keep writing — and come back to them later.
2.
Put your draft aside for a couple of days.
Stop worrying about the essay and turn to something completely different.
3.
Re-read your draft with a sharply-critical eye — as if you were a constructive critic of another student's work.
Ask yourself (a) whether the writer tells you what he or she is trying to do;(b) whether they succeed in doing it; and (c) whether they convince you it was worth doing!
4.
Pay close attention to the opening sentence of your first paragraph and the closing sentence of your last paragraph.
They continue to reverberate in your reader's mind.
5.
Identify and correct weaknesses of presentation, argument, expression, style and spelling.
Reduce for overlength.
6.
Make sure you've remembered to list your references and to provide a list of sources consulted.
Respect the academic conventions when citing authors and titles.
7.
Check that your own name, the name of your tutor, the title of the essay and the course are displayed clearly and prominently at the top of page one.
8.
Make a clear, legible copy of your final version — leaving sufficient space for your tutor to add marginal comments.
9.
Retain a spare copy for your file.
The original may be lost.
10.
Make sure the essay is handed in on time.
HOW TO IMPROVE YOUR WRITING SKILLS
Pay close attention to your tutor's critical but constructive comments on all your essays.
With practice, you will gradually develop your own critical faculties and become more self-critical.
Until then, here are some further hints on how to improve your essay-writing:
1.
Make sure your essay has answered the question.
Check that promises made in good faith in your first paragraph have been delivered by your last paragraph.
2.
Check your essay for relevance.
Your tutor may be generous to a fault but cannot reward irrelevance or peripheral knowledge display.
3.
Conciseness is a virtue — so express yourself economically.
Avoid waffle or padding.
A good essay, like a good kilt/skirt, is long enough to be decent but short enough to be interesting.
4.
Don't assume that the reader already understands your argument or automatically shares your viewpoint.
To be persuasive, you need to clarify your position, make your assumptions explicit and your meaning as clear as possible.
5.
Don't waste precious time stating the obvious.
By being subtle rather than obvious, you avoid appearing naive.
Take an unconventional line, by all means, but avoid mere displays of cleverness.
Unless they are quite brilliant, jokes are best avoided in essays.
Avoid cliches like the plague!
6.
Use relevant scientific and technical concepts to help build your case.
Personal reminiscences and anecdotes have no place in an academic essay.
Avoid making unsubstantiated assertions.
Provide evidence for your arguments throughout.
7.
Use language appropriate to your context and subject-matter.
Avoid slang, jargon and colloquial expressions that might be perfectly acceptable in speech but that are out of place in an academic essay.
Vulgarisms may make good graffiti but they are not appropriate in an academic essay.
8.
Make connections that help your writing to flow more easily and allow your meaning to emerge more clearly.
Learn to use linking devices that help to bind your argument together more tightly.
9.
Don't "anthologize" .
An essay is not simply an anthology of other people's ideas.
The reader wants to know what you think — so avoid excessive or extensive quotations from others.
10.
Correct punctuation is neither an irrelevant luxury nor a pedantic affectation: it conveys and alters exact meaning.
Learn how to use the apostrophe (to indicate either possession or contraction, not plurals!), especially in association with the three consecutive letters i, t and s.
Master its correct usage today and it's no problem tomorrow.
11.
Take pride in your writer's craft.
Don't be ashamed of having to re-write a sentence or paragraph several times to make your meaning still clearer.
Refer to a dictionary or a thesaurus of synonyms, antonyms, etc., when you're uncertain about the precise meaning or spelling of an unusual word.
12.
Finally, avoid sexist language — but don't go overboard.
 "Skilled workers' refers to both men and women but" manpower"is still manpower.
The rights of man remain inviolate, like mankind or Manchester.
But learn to use "he or she" or, more elegantly,"they, them or theirs', as appropriate rather than the male form of the pronoun all the time.
12 Critical thinking and problem-solving
Bertrand Russell complained that he spent his first year at Cambridge looking in vain for the cleverest young men in the world who, he had been assured, were there.
In his second year it dawned on him that he and his friends were the cleverest young men in the world.
Matthew Parris, The Sunday Times review of The Oxford Myth, edited by Rachel Johnston (June 1988)
This chapter tries to do three things:
1.
To explain why students need critical thinking skills.
2.
To discover whether you already know how to think.
3.
To show how to apply critical thinking to your studies.
WHY DO WE NEED TO THINK CRITICALLY?
Although we may now know much more about the chemistry of the human brain, our capacity for thought has probably not changed much over the past five thousand years.
 "I think" , said Descartes, "therefore I am" .
But how do I think?
What am I capable of thinking?
And how can that thinking help solve my own and the world's problems?
Critical and creative thinking are now fashionable on American campuses and amongst intellectuals generally — perhaps because many thinking Americans believe the "Great Society" has failed to solve sufficient of its most urgently-critical domestic problems — like drugs, violence, corruption, homelessness and the budget deficit — quite apart from its most pressing international problems — like relations with the Soviet Union, the mid-East and Latin-American crises, and so on.
Critical and creative thinking may be just another buzz phrase for thinking.
But the different ways in which thought can be creatively applied to both mental and practical problems are indispensable tools for student success.
When Marx wanted to highlight the philosophical contradictions underlying bourgeois social morality, he inverted the usual formulation — the philosophy of poverty — and wrote instead about the poverty of philosophy.
Problems, puzzles and policy issues
Puzzles are mental tasks or games that present some intellectual challenge but are easily solved.
For example, how do I get a quart of soup into a pint pot?
Flippant answer: Drink half the soup!
Serious answer: Condense the soup by boiling off half its water content.
Policy issues concern high-level strategy questions, whose character and complexity involve the examination of vast quantities of data before decisions can be taken on matters of the highest political Import.
For example, what should the government's policy be towards First Secretary  Gorbachev's attempt at perestroika (economic and social reconstruction within the Soviet Union)?
Answer: many policy issues admit to no immediately-obvious solution.
The issues are probably too complex to be adequately dealt with here, but the government should certainly give  Gorbachev's initiative every encouragement because it seems to be in this country's own long-term interests.
Problems lie somewhere between puzzles and policy issues.
A problem might be defined, somewhat abstractly perhaps, as an unsolved mental or physical task that derives from an observed deviation from the standard or norm expected.
Problems may vary considerably in their complexity but are almost invariably susceptible to solution, given time and sufficient critical and creative thought.
For example, how to land allied armies and vast quantities of supplies on the beaches of enemy-occupied Normandy during the Second World War?
Answer: Mulberry Harbour — a pre-fabricated, sectional, floating harbour, designed and built in Britain and successfully assembled on the beaches of Arromanches.
SO, YOU ALREADY KNOW HOW TO THINK?
At school, you are rewarded for knowing the right answers.
You dare not be wrong.
When schoolteachers ask questions, they already know the answers and are simply checking to make sure you know them, too.
At college, the questions you and your fellow students pose are as important as the answers supplied.
Your answers are likely to be just as right or wrong as those of your teachers.
In fact, college teachers are probably more interested in the reasoning by which you reach your answer than they are in the substantive answer itself.
In other words, they are concerned with the process of intellectual enquiry — with teaching you to learn how to think for yourself.
You may think you're quite good at solving mental problems.
If so, try this one for size:
Critical thinking problem 12.1 (See the end of this chapter for answer.)
I have three boxes.
Inside each of these boxes, I have two smaller boxes.
And, inside each of these smaller boxes, I have three yet smaller boxes.
How many boxes do I have altogether?
Dr Julia Thomason, a leading exponent of critical and creative thinking at Appalachian State University, North Carolina, says students are likely to react to this type of problem in one of four different ways:
1.
There are evasive strategists — those who say: "I don't do that type of problem!" 
2.
There are concrete operational thinkers — those who can only begin to solve such a problem in concrete operational terms by drawing physical or mental images of the boxes and then counting up the total.
3.
There are transitional thinkers — those who soon make the conceptual transition from the concrete to the more abstract form of the problem — one that is capable of being solved by a combination of multiplication and addition.
4.
There are formal operational thinkers — those who immediately grasp the abstract form of the problem and solve it quickly and easily.
This problem illustrates the simple point that there is no one way of thinking.
Different individuals, at different times, think about problems in different ways.
They use alternative, but equally valid, methods of thinking to arrive at their answers.
Since not all problems are the same, some call for one type of thinking rather than another.
Critical thinking problem 12.2 (See the end of this chapter for answer.) well-known word, using the same three letters twice, in exactly the same order:
This is essentially a linguistic problem, whose solution probably depends as much upon the range of your vocabulary, and your response to the stimulus of words, rather than upon your capacity to reason formally through a set of data in order to arrive at a valid solution.
Critical thinking problem 12.3 (See end of this chapter for answer.)
Complete the following seven-word description of Ferdinand de Lesseps (the man behind the building of the Panama Canal) in such a way that the solution is palindromic, i.e. it is capable of being read both backwards and  forwards :
Here again, whilst formal logic will not necessarily solve the problem, there are several clues contained within the problem itself.
Critical thinking problem 12.4 (See end of this chapter for answer.)
There is a terrible car crash.
The driver and passenger — the driver's child — are rushed to hospital where the senior surgeon is called upon to operate immediately to save the child's life.
Although the child is still alive, at the last minute the surgeon refuses to operate.
Can you suggest why?
The problem here is more open-ended.
There could be many possible reasons why the surgeon refuses to operate.
Try processing all the relevant information contained in the problem to help you come up with one plausible explanation.
Critical thinking problem 12.5 (See end of this chapter for answer.)
An unusually warm day in May, with temperatures soaring and a very high pollen count.
The library crowded with students, frantically revising for imminent exams.
Student A, overcome by the heat, flings open a window.
Student B immediately slams it shut, complaining bitterly of hay fever.
A quarrel ensues, distracting every student within earshot.
Two factions emerge: the "closed" and the "open" window  brigades.
The librarian, called to deal with the situation, finds no apparent room for compromise: a window must be either open or shut.
How might she still resolve the dispute by creative thinking?
If these examples reveal anything, perhaps it is the unwelcome truth that most of us are better at memorizing and applying formulae for solving certain types of predictable problems than we are at generating imaginative solutions to unfamiliar problems.
Yet the world we live in cries out for more critical and creative solutions to many, pressing problems.
One example is the Camp David Accords, worked out between Egypt and the State of Israel, with the help of President Carter and his officials and signed in 1979.
In essence the problem was this: Israel refused to withdraw its armed forces from the area of Sinai, captured after Arab armies invaded its territory during the 1973 Yom Kippur War, unless and until Egypt would guarantee the integrity of their new common frontier.
Egypt was one of several Arab states that had attacked Israel and that hitherto had refused to formally recognize the state's existence, let alone guarantee its frontiers.
It now refused to budge from that position unless and until Israel withdrew its armed forces from occupied Sinai.
This seemingly irreconcilable impasse was resolved by President Carter and his staff who encouraged both sides to take the risk of thinking more critically and creatively about solving their joint problems, along the following lines.
For a variety of diplomatic and other reasons, Egypt wanted Sinai (largely desert) back in Egyptian hands.
Israel did not want Sinai as such but insisted on the military security of its southern borders.
Israel refused to give up Sinai without some significant concession on Egypt's part.
Israel was eventually persuaded to withdraw its tanks to new, secure positions, well back from the Sinai, thus allowing Egypt to achieve some part of its principal aims — on condition that Egypt, for its part, formally recognized the State of Israel and respected the new border, thus allowing Israel to secure some part of its own principal aims.
Despite the assassination of one of the leading co-signatories, Egyptian President Sadat, and the death of the other, Israeli Prime Minister Begin, the Camp David Accords have been respected by both sides ever since their signing in 1979.
HOW TO APPLY CRITICAL THINKING TO YOUR STUDY PROBLEMS
Students frequently say they have done the recommended reading, taken the necessary notes and reviewed all their materials, but still  cannot come up with a solution to the problem posed.
Where, they ask, do you find the ideas to solve such a problem?
Ideas do not exist in a vacuum, free-floating in outer space, waiting to be corralled.
Ideas exist in our own minds and we need to master the skilled techniques for bringing them forward for evaluation and application to our problems.
Brain-storming
One of the most favoured techniques for generating ideas is brain-storming.
This is not the wild, undisciplined intellectual orgy that the name implies but a more systematic and proven method for arriving at some of the most likely solutions to a given problem or set of problems.
In brainstorming, you liberate your mind and try to react without inhibition to your subject, allowing room for any and every idea that bubbles to the surface of your mind.
The more ideas the better.
Never mind the quality — just go for as many ideas as possible.
The qualitative sieve comes later.
Brain-storming comes with practice and simply helps to generate ideas.
Next, you need to sort out those ideas into groups, according to their usefulness.
The test of the usefulness of an idea is whether it contributes much or anything to meeting two dimensions of any problem:
1.
The musts An idea does not get past first base unless it meets the musts contained within the problem specification.
For example, if I'm starting college and searching for somewhere to live, I might come up with a dozen possible ideas.
But I've specified that the address must be within a half-hour's cycle ride from college and must not cost more than £x per week inclusive of heating and lighting.
Any places that fall outside those parameters fail the must test and can be rejected, no matter how attractive they may otherwise be.
2.
The wants Having satisfied the must test, every idea is then scrutinized to see how many of the wants it fulfils.
For example, the initial listing of a dozen possible places to live has now been reduced to, say, six.
And these six can now be further reduced by asking which of them meets a number of desirable but not essential wants: Which of them has a garden?
Which of them is nearest to a bus route?
Which of them is close to shops?
And so on.
By adding the pluses and minuses, it soon becomes apparent which of the remaining six places we ought to go to visit for a final decision.
The final choice probably comes down to just one of the two remaining places.
Brain-storming is simply one of a number of"thinking techniques' developed and popularized over recent decades to help us think more efficiently and creatively.
Others include lateral thinking, straight and crooked thinking, potential problem analysis, rational decision-making, and so on.
If you begin to apply some of these techniques to your studies and make them part of your habits of thought, you'll find it much easier to solve problems, to write better essays and to produce higher-scoring examination answers.
SOLUTIONS TO CRITICAL THINKING PROBLEMS
Problem 12.1
(Grateful thanks are expressed to Dr Julia Thomason of Appalachian State University, North Carolina, for this example, taken from her own creative work on critical thinking skills.
See Suggestions for further reading above.)
The correct answer is twenty-seven boxes.
If you have the answer as eighteen, you've probably forgotten to add in the additional boxes at each stage.
The critical word here is "each" .
Problem 12.2
The solution is UNDERGROUND.
There were two clues in the problem: first, that the letters had to appear in the same order, which helped you try out possible solutions; second, the word"descend.
Problem 12.3
The solution is A MAN, A PLAN, A CANAL: PANAMA.
The clues contained in the problem were the two commas and one colon.
If you spotted that the word after the colon was PANAMA, the chances are you were soon able to supply the other missing consonants.
Problem 12.4
The surgeon may have refused to operate on the passenger because it was her own baby.
The driver, in other words, was the surgeon's husband.
If you had difficulty with this one, it may have been due to sexual stereotyping — i.
e. you assumed the surgeon was a man.
Problem 12.5
The imaginative librarian first appeals for silence, to allow other students to get back to work.
She then invites students A and B into her room to discuss the matter calmly.
They soon agree that what they both want is a gentle current of fresh air, without direct draughts.
She resolves the dispute by closing the library windows, opening all the windows in the rooms immediately adjacent to the library and propping open all the communicating doors.
The librarian has applied critical and creative thinking, solving the problems to the satisfaction of all concerned.
13 Pass those exams — and stay human
Finals had been, in many ways, the supreme moment of his life…
In the preceding months he had prepared himself with meticulous care, filling his mind with distilled knowledge, drop by drop, until…it was almost brimming over.
Each morning for the next ten days he bore this precious vessel to the examinations balls and poured a measured quantity of the contents on to pages of ruled quarto.
David Lodge, Changing Places (1975)
This chapter tries to do three things:
1.
To explain the reasons for exams.
2.
To help you prepare intelligently for exams.
3.
To help you improve your exam technique.
WHY HAVE EXAMINATIONS?
Exams are an inevitable source of stress.
They represent the culmination of a term or year's work or the end-point of a course of  study.
They are in every sense of the phrase "a testing time" for students and examiners alike.
So, what's the point of exams?
All colleges and institutions of higher education are required to carry out some assessment of student performance and potential.
How does this student's work compare with that of fellow students in terms of quantity and quality of output?
How does this student's work measure up to what teachers expect at this stage?
To answer such questions from potential employers or grant-awarding bodies (e.g. research institutes), teachers have to make assessments as impartially as possible.
An "unseen" exam paper allows different examiners to mark the same answers independently and to arrive at a fairly consistent and impartial assessment of the candidate's overall performance and potential.
At most institutions, the preferred method of assessment combines the marks obtained by students in "continuous assessment" throughout the academic year with final examination results.
By this means, a student who suffers badly from "exam nerves' may benefit from having obtained good essay or project marks; conversely, students who dislike preparing written work on their own but who respond well under the time pressure of an" unseen"exam may also do well.
Despite student impressions to the contrary, exams are not designed to set traps for unwary students.
Rather, they aim to provide all students with the opportunity to demonstrate their knowledge of their subjects, their analytical skills and their capacity to handle complex issues under time pressure.
So, if you've attended lectures, done the recommended reading, taken part in tutorial or seminar discussions, and completed your written assignments (paying particular attention to the constructive feedback given by your teachers), you have little to fear from examinations.
But you still need to prepare.
HOW TO PREPARE INTELLIGENTLY FOR EXAMS
No athlete would dream of entering a big race without adequate preparation, both physical and psychological.
You need to adopt the same approach to examinations.
If you start your preparation too early, you'll reach peak fitness too soon.
But if you leave your preparation until the last minute, you'll almost certainly panic and reduce your chances of scoring high marks on the day.
Only you can decide when to begin your exam preparation.
The most important thing is to start in good time.
If your exams are in May/June, you should certainly start your exam preparation by Easter.
You can always take a few days off immediately before the exam to rest and refresh yourself.
TEN GOLDEN RULES FOR EXAM REVISION
Students study and learn in different ways.
No one best way suits all students.
We suggest ten golden rules for exam revision, but like all rules, they need to be interpreted flexibly.
Rule 1: take a positive attitude towards your exams
Start with the right psychological frame of mind.
Remind yourself why exams are necessary (to measure student performance and to assess student potential), and why you are going to do well (because you've been reasonably conscientious and have prepared intelligently).
Rule 2: reduce stress and increase self-confidence
Make yourself familiar with the form of the exam.
Most exams follow the pattern of earlier years.
They nearly always offer a choice of questions, based on the syllabus that has been taught.
Make sure there's no plan to change the exam format this year.
Study past exam papers, noting the exam format, the choice of questions, and the all-important time limit.
Examine the style and wording as well as the content of questions.
Don't assume that questions will be worded in the same way every year.
Examiners enjoy finding new way of asking old questions.
Rule 3: review your study material systematically
Go through your entire stock of learning materials (lecture, reading and tutorial notes, handouts, essays, newspaper cuttings, etc.), making a careful index under major and minor headings, with cross-references.
Once you begin your revision, it's generally not a good idea to undertake new reading.
Last-minute learning is often poorly absorbed and"blocks' your memory.
Rule 4: revise actively, not passively
Revision means more than "re-viewing" or passing your eye across pages of lecture notes.
Active revision means "engaging" your material in a questioning approach: do you understand what your notes mean?
Identify concepts, theories and writers.
Follow up points you don't understand.
Summarize your notes on cards under key headings and sub-headings.
Revise from cards at odd moments.
Rule 5: learn how to retrieve and use your knowledge
Practise the art of retrieving ideas and making use of your knowledge.
Learn to "string" ideas together by making connections between concepts and theories from different areas.
Use concepts across the  frontiers of knowledge.
In that way, you get the best return on the time and effort you put into revision.
Rule 6: practise structuring effective exam answers
Good exam technique only comes with practice.
Candidates who come to grief in exams often lack practice in structuring their thoughts into an effective exam answer.
One page of well structured answer is worth ten pages of unstructured "waffle" .
Rule 7: practise writing some complete exam answers
Get used to writing continuously for, say, forty minutes without a break.
This helps you to develop writing skills and to manage your most important exam resource: time.
Don't give up half-way through.
Keep going.
You can always fill in the missing details later.
Be kind to yourself in judging your first attempts at answering exam questions under a time constraint.
Don't panic!
Rule 8: don't daydream or drift into a negative frame of mind
Maintain good morale and keep fit during your revision.
Remember to take regular breaks for fresh air, exercise and refreshment.
Avoid excessive tea, coffee and alcohol.
Take no drugs unless prescribed by a doctor.
After a break, see whether you can capture the key points of the last topic you revised.
Rule 9: consider the value of cooperative revision
Most students revise alone.
Some become anxious and depressed because they fall behind.
Others find it best to work in a revision group.
Tackling revision questions with fellow students reminds you that you're not alone; it allows you to comment constructively on one another 's outline answers; it saves time; it is mutually supportive and helps you maintain good morale.
Rule 10: maintain a balanced revision timetable
Don't revise a few topics to the exclusion of all others.
Spread your revision over two or more subjects each day.
Take a day off now and then as a reward.
Remember, you're building yourself up to peak performance on the day of the exam.
Take regular physical exercise and get sufficient rest throughout revision.
HOW TO IMPROVE YOUR EXAM TECHNIQUE
Avoiding panic
Nothing creates more panic than arriving late for an exam.
Allow  sufficient time to get there.
Avoid anything that tends to increase your anxiety.
Don't under any circumstances try to do last-minute reading.
You'll simply "swamp" your mind.
Check that your writing materials, etc., are in good order.
And use the toilet shortly before entering the examination hall.
Budgeting your time
Before the exam begins, listen carefully to the instructions given by the invigilator.
As soon as the exam begins, check the instructions at the top of the paper to make sure that the format and duration of the exam have not been changed.
Budget your time according to your practice routine.
If you're asked to answer, say, four questions in three hours, allow yourself sufficient time to study the exam paper and select the right questions for you to answer on that day.
If all questions carry the same maximum marks, your answers should be given roughly equal time.
In three hours (180 minutes), you can allow yourself a generous 5 minutes for reading the questions at the outset, followed by four answers of 40 minutes each (160 minutes), which still leaves a 15-minute margin at the end.
With 40 minutes per question, you might decide to allocate your time roughly as follows:
Thinking about the question = 5 minutes
Structuring your answer = 5 minutes
Writing your answer = 25 minutes
Reading through your answer = 5 minutes
Total = 40 minutes
Selecting the right questions
Only you know which are the right questions for you to attempt.
You might start by dividing the questions into three groups:
Group 1 Questions about which you know most and feel most confident.
These are your target questions.
Group 2 Questions about which you know something but are perhaps not fully confident.
This is your reserve group.
Group 3 Questions about which you know least and feel least confident.
Discard this group.
In an ideal exam, you'll find your four favourite questions in group 1.
If not, you should select them from group 2.
If the exam paper is sub-divided into parts, make sure you answer the correct number of questions from each part, otherwise you'll lose marks, no matter how good your answers may be.
Decoding exam questions
Before you can answer an exam question, you must first "decode" the question to find what the examiners are "driving at" .
It pays to read each question very carefully before you begin your answer.
Many exam candidates lose marks simply because they don't bother to read the question carefully enough and therefore fail to answer the question that's posed.
1.
Direct questions usually begin with a command verb (e.g. examine, analyse, explain, outline, etc.).
Remember to carry out the command.
If you're asked to analyse some concept, it won't be sufficient merely to describe it.
2.
Indirect questions often take the form of a provocative quotation you are asked to discuss.
Beware of over-simplifying your answer.
Honour the complexities of the question and try to show, by your answer, that you are aware of its many different facets.
3.
Multi-part questions require you to do justice to all its parts.
If you neglect, for example, the second part of a two-part question, you could lose up to half the marks for that question.
4.
The disguised question is simply a familiar question in a different form.
Many candidates don't recognize what the question is driving at.
Their minds seem "triggered" by some key word(s) in the question and they immediately plunge into an uncritical and largely irrelevant answer.
You must penetrate the disguise and discover what the question is really about.
Structuring an effective answer
Having "decoded" the question, allow your mind to associate freely on the question for a couple of minutes.
Then gather your thoughts, perhaps using Buzan's starburst technique (see Chapter 9 on taking notes from reading).
Jot down quickly (in about five minutes) the key ideas, concepts, authors, theories, etc., that you intend to use in answering the question.
What you need is a simple but effective structure or framework, strong enough to support the weight of your answer.
The better the structure, the more effective your answer.
A good structure consists of key words or phrases, not sentences, shaped into a coherent framework on which to hang your answer.
A good structure helps your answer flow more logically.
So you need lots of practice in structuring effective answers.
(see Ch.11 for advice on structuring).
Writing an effective answer
1.
Waste no time on preliminaries: you score no marks for writing  out the question — that simply wastes time.
Every minute counts in an exam, so get straight down to your answer.
2.
Approach the question logically and sensibly.
Tackle the question directly and adopt a reasoned approach to the issues raised.
3.
Give special attention to the first and last paragraphs and the first an last sentences of your answer.
4.
Give your answer a strong conclusion.
Many candidates simply leave their answer in mid-air.
What's needed is a conclusion that pulls together the threads of your argument and rounds off the answer in a satisfying way.
It should not simply repeat what's gone before or raise important fresh issues.
It may be used to emphasize your key points.
Above all, it should convince the examiner you've answered the question.
Scoring higher exam marks
What strengths do examiners look for in an exam answer?
1.
Comprehension Has the candidate understood the question?
If you don't show that you've understood the question, you can't answer it effectively.
2.
Relevance Does the candidate stick to the issues raised in the question or wander off down by-ways?
You score no marks for irrelevance or displays of peripheral knowledge.
3.
Analytical ability Does the candidate reason his or her way through the question or simply muddle along its surface?
Analysis means getting below the surface of the question.
4.
Expression Can the candidate express ideas clearly, effectively and concisely?
The length of an answer is no test of its effectiveness.
A well-structured short answer is better than a weakly-structured long answer.
Don't pad out your answer to make it seem impressive.
Waffle is the examiner's bogey!
14 Writing a research dissertation or project report
He had done his initial research on Jane Austen, but since then had turned his attention to topics as various as medieval sermons, Elizabethan sonnet sequences, Restoration heroic tragedy, eighteenth-century broadsides, the novels of William Godwin, the poetry of Elizabeth Barrett Browning and premonitions of the Theatre of the Absurd in the plays of George Bernard Shaw.
None of these projects had been completed He ran hither and thither between the shelves of Eng.
Lit. like a child in a toyshop — so reluctant to choose one item to the exclusion of others that he ended up empty-handed.
David Lodge, Changing Places (1975)
This chapter tries to do three things:
1.
To explain the purpose of a dissertation or project report.
2.
To help you structure such a report.
3.
To help you write and present a better report.
THE PURPOSE OF A DISSERTATION OR PROJECT REPORT
In the preparation of a project report, as in the organization of any other form of writing, structure is the function of purpose.
You should, therefore, keep uppermost in your mind the principal purpose of your report.
This is not just another essay, nor is it a PhD thesis.
It is an opportunity for you to develop and demonstrate your skill in identifying, carrying out, and writing up a discrete piece of research, using the academic concepts, the theoretical insights and the practical abilities acquired on your course.
This is your project.
Unless you are a member of a joint research team, the results will represent entirely your own work and your examiners will judge it accordingly.
The secret of writing a successful dissertation (or project report) is preparation.
In other words, you must have a good plan of what you propose to do and a realistic timetable from the outset.
By keeping a sense of direction and watching your timing throughout the project, you reduce to a minimum the risk of last-minute panic.
Your first tasks are amongst the hardest: to clear your head and to get down to really thinking through the essence of your project:
1.
What exactly is the problem or subject you intend to investigate?
Unless you focus closely on the problem, you'll never succeed in your research or writing.
2.
What are the main lines of enquiry you intend to pursue?
You must think your way forward, cutting through the peripheral material, to arrive at the heart of your subject.
3.
Identify your problem area and define your objectives briefly and coherently in written form.
4.
Discuss these first written ideas with your project supervisor.
To assist that discussion, you need to prepare three pieces of paper:
(a) A one-page synopsis or summary of the essential argument or line of investigation you intend to follow.
(b) An outline structure of the main sections of your report and the amount of space (i.e. the number of words) you intend to devote to each section.
(c) A draft timetable (which can be amended later) showing the dates by which you hope to progress your project from now until the date of submission.
Because your synopsis, structure and timetable are the keys to a successful project, they should be given priority attention.
Sometimes it helps to produce two or three alternative structures, embodying quite different approaches to the same material.
After reflection, you  can select the best version or even combine the best elements from two or more versions.
STRUCTURING YOUR REPORT
Whatever the subject-matter of your report, your structure should ideally combine the following elements.
(For reports in Science Engineering and Technology, see Ch.11).
1.
Title page, which specifies the title, author(s), for whom or what the report is submitted, date, department or place of origin.
2.
Table of contents, which outlines the structure of the report and shows the page numbers of each section.
3.
Summary, which provides a one-page synopsis, encapsulating the heart of the report.
4.
Introduction.
(a) which explains what the report is about;(b) which provides a statement of the problem or subject of enquiry;(c) which says how you interpret the problem;(d) which indicates your approach to the task; and (e) which explains the lay-out of your report.
5.
Context
(a) which locates your project within a set of defined contexts (geographical, historical, economic, social, political, scientific, technological or combination);(b) which locates your project within a specific organization, where appropriate, delimiting those areas you intend to cover, those you propose to ignore — and why; and (c) which locates your project within an historical continuum and explains the time scale within which you carried out your empirical research (a chronology may be useful in an appendix).
6.
Review of literature
(a) which provides a summary of the main theories and arguments advanced by earlier researchers and writers in your chosen field of enquiry; and (b) which indicates the studies you intend to replicate, or the  theories you intend to rely upon, or the hypotheses you intend to test by your own research.
7.
Methodology
(a) which describes the alternative methods you considered before deciding how to tackle the problem; and (b) which says which method you finally adopted — and why.
8.
Research data or findings
(a) which sets out the data you assembled during your research in sufficient detail to allow your reader to understand the analysis that is to follow; and (b) which refers your reader to more detailed research data in the appendices to your report.
9.
Discussion or analysis of findings
(a) which highlights what you believe to be the principal findings, usually in rank order of importance to you, or to the organization under investigation; and (b) which interprets your findings and discusses their meaning and significance in the light of your prior knowledge and reading of the relevant literature.
10.
Conclusions/recommendations
(a) which sets out in summary form the most important information derived from your research and the main lessons to be learned from your interpretation of that information;(b) which spells out the policy implications of your findings and, where appropriate, the follow-up actions that appear to be necessary; and (c) which indicates what further research might be undertaken to pursue some of the findings uncovered by your own research.
11.
Notes and references
(a) which provide footnotes to material cited in the main body of your report (including author, title, place of publication, publisher and year of publication); and  (b) which elaborates important but subsidiary ideas that were too detailed to be contained in the body of the report.
12.
Bibliography, which cites the principal sources on which you have drawn for your research, in alphabetical order of authors' surnames.
13.
Appendices, which set out on separate numbered pages any detailed material, unsuitable for inclusion in the body of your report.
WRITING UP YOUR PROJECT REPORT
You should not think of starting to write unless and until you've completed four crucial preliminary stages:
1.
Thinking about the meaning and content of your subject-matter and how you intend to approach the problem.
This thinking should not be in abstraction but in writing.
2.
Researching your subject to discover what other researchers have found before you.
This takes the form of an "academic literature search" and is often very time-consuming.
3.
Organizing your ideas and your research material into some coherent line of argument or exposition.
Students often find this the most difficult task: you have masses of material but now need to assess significance and establish priorities.
4.
Structuring your material into an effective pattern that allows you to present your ideas as effectively as possible.
At this point you should go back to amend your first draft structure before you start writing.
There is no "one best way" to write up your project; we all have our tried and preferred methods (see Chapter 11 on better college writing).
There is nothing wrong with starting in the middle or wherever you find it easiest to begin, but beware of leaving the most difficult sections until the end.
You may well run out of time — or steam!
15 Fit for studying?
Erst kommt das Fressen, dann kommt die Moral (Food comes first; ideology comes later)
Bertolt Brecht, Threepenny Opera, 1934
This chapter tries to do three things:
1.
To tell you how to feel great and fit for study.
2.
To explain the importance of healthy nutrition.
3.
To suggest ways to exercise sensibly and stay fit.
HOW TO FEEL GREAT AND FIT FOR STUDY
Health and fitness seem rather boring "goody goody" subjects.
Debauchery, let's face it, seems so much more exciting.
But the  "bottom line" is that excesses lead to illness.
What can be interesting is feeling more alive, having more energy and in general feeling great.
Nutrition and exercise are the two keys to fitness and health.
Nutrition
Nutrition was not always the problem it is today.
During the last war, for example, when people grew their own fruit and vegetables, when meat was rationed and anything sweet was in short supply, the nation was much healthier.
Today, the arrival of convenience foods with sometimes creamy fattening sauces, or hidden sugar, salt, fat and preservatives has changed our eating habits.
The freezing and canning process reduces the number of nutrients in food.
Fewer people grow their own vegetables or make their own soup.
Opening a polythene bag or a can is the most we manage to do.
And why bother baking a potato when a packet of crisps is to hand?
The trouble is that though the fibre content may be the same, the fat content, which furs arteries, is eleven times higher.
At the same time, patterns of energy have changed.
For example, we walk less than we used to as most families have cars and the launderette or the washing machine has replaced the scrubbing board.
So energy output in general has been reduced.
At school we may have been encouraged, even coerced into running around at sports.
There is the danger that, when we get to college, this grinds to a halt when there is no one to tell you to do it.
We shall return later to the benefits of exercise, but first, let's examine our eating habits.
Diets and dieting
Over-eating and over-drinking have become major problems for Western society.
In 1983, research showed that in Britain 26 per cent of all adults were trying to lose weight, 35 per cent of all women.
That's a lot of people, so as in the nature of things, dieting became big business with faddy diets and weight-loss systems abounding.
There are creams to rub on offending areas, potato diets, banana and milk diets, grapefruit and egg diets, and very low calorie diets.
The problem with these is that at the moment they end we say "Thank God that's over!" and return to eating "normally" — "normally" being all the rubbish we ate before.
Of course, the weight goes back on and we become human yoyos.
We should not embark on diets if we are not prepared to change our eating habits for life.
A colleague, Sarah, recently graduated, decided to go on a very low calorie diet.
She lost 4 stones (25.5 kg) in four months — too quickly by anybody's reckoning — and put all the weight back on, and more, in the  ensuing four months.
Her problem now is that her body has adapted to her starvation regime by slowing down her metabolism.
Losing weight for Sarah is now a difficult task.
Changing your diet, rather than dieting, is a healthier alternative.
There are changes we should all make (if we have not made them already) that have nothing to do with losing weight but are more to do with equipping ourselves for working at peak performance.
It's a sad fact that machines are better maintained than bodies.
A Martian viewing our race might wonder at our lemming-like ability to self-destruct by gobbling up nasty foods, smoking little chimneys and falling sideways as a result of consuming quantities of amber liquid.
Complete your diet questionnaire to judge whether you need to make any changes in your diet.
Your diet questionnaire
Tick yes or no to the following questions:
1.
Do you eat fried food as a general rule?
2.
Do you drink some alcohol most days?
3.
Do you sprinkle salt on your food?
4.
Do you eat between meals, e.g. crisps and peanuts?
5.
Do you take sugar in tea or coffee?
6.
Do you eat sweets and chocolate?
7.
Do you avoid eating vegetables?
8.
Do you avoid drinking milk?
9.
When you get uptight or depressed, do you put on weight?
10.
Do you sometimes feel you will never become the weight you desire?
Any Yes answer denotes a vulnerability in your diet and ultimately your health.
Let's discuss each point in turn.
1.
Frying food increases the fat content, which adds to the waistline and the cholesterol intake.
Coronary heart disease specialists advocate a diet low in cholesterol.
Grilled, steamed or microwaved foods offer a far healthier diet.
2.
The occasional drink can be beneficial and enjoyable but there are dangers.
For a start, it's high in calories — about 180 calories per pint of beer, 80–100 calories per glass for a dry white wine.
So, alcohol plays a part in obesity but in addition, physical and  mental performance are impaired.
Concentration and decision-making are affected, more errors are made and the effects can be long-lasting.
For every unit of alcohol (half a pint of beer; one glass of wine), it takes one hour to clear itself from the body.
So, the effects of 4 pints of beer at lunch would take 8 hours to dissipate.
Heavy drinking correlates with a number of physical conditions, e.g. hepatitis, cirrhosis of the liver, sexual difficulties, brain damage and high blood pressure.
Vitamins are also affected.
The current clampdown on drinking and driving has allowed people without embarrassment to ask for soft drinks at functions and market forces have led to an influx of low-alcohol wines and beers.
3.
Salt in itself is not bad but in excess it stimulates the adrenals, encourages hypertension, arteriosclerosis and the retention of water in fatty tissue (cellulite).
It also affects the kidneys, upsets hormonal balance and is mildly addictive.
A sign of taking too much salt is if you find it difficult to remove the salt cellar from the table.
There is sufficient salt for our needs in food already, without adding more.
Try missing it out for two weeks and you will habituate to non-use.
4.
Eating between meals supplies hidden calories.
Often called "dietary amnesia" , half biscuits, peanuts, bits of cheese are eaten without the conscious knowledge of the consumer.
Crisps, as discussed before, have a high fat content and peanuts, though good protein, are again high in calories and are often covered with salt.
Thinking about food between meals, after meals or all the time predisposes snacking behaviour and overeating.
An obsession with food can be found in those who perhaps lead boring lives or, at the other end of the spectrum, stressed lives.
5.
Sugar is 17 calories per teaspoonful.
If, on average, a person takes 4 cups of tea/coffee per day, that is an extra 476 calories per week, or 24,752 calories per year.
For someone who is only moderately active, that could mean a 7- or 8 lb (3- or 3.5-kg) increase in weight over a year.
By the same token, if cut out, there would be the same amount of weight loss.
To break the habit, try leaving sugar out of drinks for that magic two weeks.
Most people find they cannot tolerate sugar after that period.
Refined white sugar is also entirely lacking in nutrients and adds nothing to our diet.
6.
Puddings, sweets and chocolate are very high in calories and, of course, sugar.
Without totally excising them from your diet, it's advisable to cut down.
7.
Vegetables are an excellent source of vitamin A, B6, E, C, minerals, protein and fibre.
Be adventurous.
Try different  vegetables to find out which you like.
Remember, they will taste better than school cabbage.
8.
Milk is a very important food.
Containing protein, vitamins and calcium, milk is especially important for our diet if we wish to avoid osteoporosis (brittle bones) in later life.
Whole milk contains fat, so a better choice that still retains the calcium content is semi-skimmed or skimmed milk.
Other sources of calcium if milk does not agree with you are yoghurt, cheese, shrimps and ice cream.
9.
The stress response in relation to being overweight is now being recognized by professionals.
When stressed, we release cortisone into the body and this increases the appetite.
Eating also has a relaxing effect, which is fine.
But if this is your only way of relaxing then you may acquire a weight problem.
For other relaxation techniques, see Chapter 18 on managing stress.
10.
Many people are negative about their ability to control their diet.
Self-disgust and guilt about over-eating maintain these cognitions.
Learning to think positively and to look towards healthy outcomes can help considerably in any diet programme.
The balanced diet
For good nutrition and a balanced diet, first on the list is protein.
Protein is bade up of amino acids and forms all our cells — nails, hair, skin, blood, etc.
Animal protein is good for us but may have cholesterol embedded in it — like fatty meat.
Non-animal protein is better because it is low in fat and cholesterol.
Simple carbohydrates give us energy quickly, e.g. sweets, and sugar generally, but that energy is quickly dissipated.
Complex carbohydrates on the other hand, e.g. pasta, release energy over a longer period of time.
So, hunger is kept at bay longer.
As a rule, we eat too many simple carbohydrates and not enough complex ones.
Fats are necessary for heat and energy.
They protect the organs of the body and insulate us from the cold.
But too much fat leads to obesity and heart disease.
As in everything, "moderation" is the watchword.
Fibre is essential in a diet to "flush" us out.
Potatoes, brown bread and cereals all help to this end (pardon the pun).
Vitamins spark the body into action.
Since they are not produced by the body, we must get them from our diet and a deficiency in one can lead to an impairment in others.
To get all these we need a balanced diet.
The daily food guide will help you plan your meals each day.
And remember, you must eat these foods on a daily basis.
An orange eaten on Monday will not supply you with Vitamin C until Friday.
A daily food guide
Meats Two or more lean servings daily.
Count as a serving 3 oz (85g) of cooked meat, fish or poultry.
Use eggs, cheese, beans, peas, pulses and nuts as alternatives, if vegetarian.
Cereals Four or more servings daily.
Count as a serving one slice of bread, half a cup of cooked wholemeal cereal or pasta and three-quarters cup ready-to-eat cereal.
Use a whole grain or enriched product.
Fruits and vegetables Four or more servings daily.
Choose citrus fruits, tomatoes, strawberries, or other vitamin-C rich fruit daily.
Use dark green or yellow vegetables frequently.
Milk Two or more glasses semi-skimmed milk daily for adults.
Three or more glasses whole milk daily for children.
Four or more whole milk, semi-skimmed milk or skimmed milk for students.
Why a balanced diet is difficult to achieve
When we shop or eat out in cafés, college canteens or restaurants, we tend to select food for appeal and taste, not nutrient value.
At the same time, we are often too busy to eat regularly, grabbing what is easiest rather than what is good for us.
Then we wonder why we have no energy.
The personal dislike of some foods such as vegetables, milk, liver, seafood (all good sources of nutrients) may limit a person's diet and lead to a depletion in a particular nutrient.
Also, buying canned or frozen food rather than fresh food cuts down our vitamin intake by as much as 25–30 per cent.
And it usually works out more expensive.
Even fresh food, if stored for long periods, will lose its vitamin content.
Recently, in one supermarket, oranges were selected randomly, some juice extracted and analysed.
Not an ounce of vitamin C did they contain.
So, shop where you know there is high turnover of produce.
The preparation of food can limit a balanced diet.
When we cook potatoes or vegetables, we often scrape off the outer layer, which is most nutritious (i.e. the fibrous bit just under the skin), then boil off any remaining vitamins into the water, which is then poured down the sink.
We literally throw our nutrition away.
But if potatoes were cooked with their skins on, steamed or microwaved, carrots were scrubbed rather than peeled, and fresh fruit and vegetables chosen, then nutritionally we would be more equipped for living.
EXERCISE
When talking about nutrition as the input of calories to the body, outputs and calorie usage must be discussed.
Digesting food uses up about 20 per cent of our calorie intake but the rest must be worked off  by the energy we expend while living our lives.
If these lives are sedentary then we risk becoming unfit and obese.
Advantages of exercise
The fact that exercise reduces stress is discussed in Chapter 18, managing stress.
As a student, it's not always easy to avoid stress, so employing coping strategies is sometimes necessary.
Exercise can burn up the adrenalin that worry, fear and frustration create, leaving the body relaxed and rested.
After exercise you look good and feel good.
A sagging body and a grey face do nothing for your confidence.
Exercise stimulates blood flow to the skin and so gives rise to a healthy appearance.
Exercise, in addition to good nutrition, can guard against a whole range of serious ailments.
The right kind of exercise can cure back pain, headaches and chest pain.
Becoming more efficient at your studies is another side-effect of exercise, quite apart from reduced sickness absence from lectures and tutorials.
Increased ability to concentrate and to make decisions has been shown to accompany the fit person.
Exercise stimulates the brain so, in general, students who exercise regularly will look and be fit.
Five myths about exercise
Given the immense benefits of exercise, why do so many students try to avoid it?
We tell ourselves that it's something we should be starting on"one of these days'.
Perhaps you were active at school but have now become active only in spectator sports; perhaps you have considered becoming more physically active but have lost your momentum before you ever began.
Here are a few myths about exercise you might have believed in:
Myth no. 1: you have to be an athlete to exercise At school, did you simply go through the motions in your physical-education class?
Did you find the activities difficult and unenjoyable?
Don't worry, there are many enjoyable physical activities in the "real world" — activities that don't require special athletic background or "natural" abilities.
Myth no. 2: exercising takes too much time Do you have a hectic timetable and feel you just don't have the time to exercise?
A regular exercise programme can require only 30 to 45 minutes, three times a week.
In other words, one-and-a-half to two hours of exercise per week may be all that is required to improve your level of fitness.
Myth no. 3: playing 18 holes of go If or a couple of sets of tennis at the weekend is enough to keep you fit Exercising once a week is not enough to make you fit.
In fact, such spurts of exercise can be  hazardous to a body that's not conditioned to handle sudden bursts of activity.
You are more liable to injury when you exercise infrequently or irregularly.
A weekly game of golf or tennis can, however, be an enjoyable part of a regular exercise programme.
Myth no. 4: exercise increases the appetite, so it can't help me lose weight Actually, the very opposite is true.
Regular, moderate exercise helps regulate the appetite so that it more closely reflects your calorie needs.
Exercise also keeps body fat from accumulating.
Myth no. 5: exercise will take too much of my energy and leave me exhausted If you're exhausted at the end of the day, you'll probably benefit from more exercise not less.
Many students who exercise find that they need less sleep and have more stamina because their muscles can work harder and longer with less effort.
Also, students who exercise regularly put less strain on their cardiovascular systems while accomplishing tasks.
To become fit — and stay fit — you must tackle three aspects of exercise: stamina, strength and flexibility.
Stamina — aerobic exercise Aerobic means with oxygen.
Aerobic exercise is characterized by the body using large muscle groups in rhythmical continuous activity for relatively long periods of time.
Examples of aerobic exercise are running, cycling, swimming, aerobic fitness sessions.
For the unfit individual, three times per week should be the maximum number of exercise sessions.
Too much too soon causes injuries.
Regular, enjoyable exercise is the key to fitness improvement.
On the other hand, if you exercise less than twice per week, you are unlikely to make any noticeable fitness gains.
Studies suggest that for improvements in aerobic capacity, you must raise your heart rate for at least 20 minutes per session.
Initially some individuals will find it hard to keep exercising for 20 minutes because their joints and muscles are not accustomed to exercise.
In this situation you should gradually work up to the 20-minute target.
Finally, studies have shown fitness improvement levels off once you are easily able to exercise for 30 minutes.
Therefore 30 minutes is a good target to aim for.
Strength — muscle conditioning Good muscle tone helps maintain stability of the joints and the postural muscles play an important part in a remarkable number of everyday tasks.
The conditioning of muscles is, therefore, of importance to everyone but may be of additional importance to those who are interested in modifying their body shape through exercise.
Lifting weights or exercising in the college gym three times per week will help build strength.
This may not, however, in itself provide sufficient aerobic exercise.
I suggest this cautionary note as a result of  personal experience.
I worked out in a gym three times a week but when my fitness was tested for the BBC's The Fitness Programme (which, embarrassingly, I was presenting), it was discovered that although my biceps were passable, my heart and lungs were unaffected by my muscle conditioning.
I was unfit.
A relaxed jogging programme for 20 minutes, three times a week, for six weeks improved my fitness from just average to the "high good" category.
Flexibility When your body is warmed up, you're physiologically more able to stretch the muscle ligaments and increase joint mobility.
Regular and controlled stretching exercises will allow your limbs to operate through a greater range of movements with a much-reduced chance of muscle strain.
You must be careful, however, to avoid excessive stretching.
Five to ten minutes of stretching after exercise or attending a yoga class will help promote flexibility.
Now, write down the things you definitely know you do not like to do for exercise.
There is space for five items, but you might have more.
Make your categories specific.
If you think you might possibly enjoy doing a particular exercise, but it is not something terribly exciting, do not write it down.
This list is exclusively for things you definitely know you do not want to do, for example, 1.
running; 2. swimming; 3. ski-ing; 4.  tobogganing ; 5. karate.
Write down the answers to the questions listed below.
Your answers will provide you with general categories of physical activities that are appropriate for you at this time.
1.
Do you prefer to exercise indoors or out-of-doors?
2.
Do you prefer to exercise with other people or by yourself?
3.
Do you prefer to exercise in the morning, afternoon or evening?
4.
Do you prefer to sandwich your exercise in along with your daily activities or to set aside time exclusively for exercise?
5.
Do you mind having to change your clothing to exercise?
6.
Do you mind getting your hair messed up?
7.
Do you prefer to exercise in a gymnasium?
8.
Do you prefer structure in your exercise or to do your own thing?
9.
Do you prefer exercise that has a high level of excitement attached to it?
10.
Would you prefer exercise that allows you to mark definite progress in your skill?
11.
Do you like to have competition in exercise?
12.
Is your preference to find something to enjoy, or just get the exercise finished and out of the way?
As a result of your answers, summarize your strongest preferences in Figure 15.1 taking into account stamina, strength and flexibility.
Now  commit yourself to a date to start, whom you will exercise with, and where you will exercise.
In conclusion, if you can manage to balance your inputs and outputs, eat nutritionally and exercise regularly, your ability to study will certainly be enhanced.
16 Tobacco and other addictive substances
In a consumer society there are inevitably two kinds of slaves: The Prisoners of addiction and the prisoners of envy.
Ivan Illich, Tools for Conviviality (1973)
This chapter tries to do three things:
1.
To explain the most important facts about drugs.
2.
To examine the effects of drug abuse.
3.
To advise you how to get help on drugs.
THE FACTS ABOUT DRUGS
Drugs are used all the time in contemporary society.
Some of the most commonly used, alcohol and tobacco, have the most serious effects on health.
These drugs may be legal but, in the long term and short term, they can be dangerous.
Even drugs developed for medical use can be abused.
Drugs prescribed by doctors can be extremely hazardous if used in the wrong way.
Everyday drugs, like aspirin, actually damage the stomach while curing headache.
The less you rely on any drugs, the better for your health in the long run.
The pressures on young people — especially students — to use drugs are increasing.
At college, you may find yourself being offered drugs.
Don't be pressured into taking them until you know the facts.
It's worth remembering that all drugs are open to abuse, and that people offer what they believe to be plausible explanations for such abuse: "To escape my problems';" To relieve boredom ";" To stay awake at parties'; "For self-confidence" ; "To be one of the crowd" ; "To help me get on with people" ; "To stop me worrying" ; "To become more creative" ; "To help me study all night" ; "It blows my mind" ; "For a pick-me-up" .
Rather than helping them "get away from it all" , for many young people the misuse of drugs can add to their problems.
Some begin by expressing the need for drugs; then become physically or mentally dependent on drugs and can't cope with life without them; some eventually become addicted to drugs.
Tolerance means that with regular use, you need to increase the dose to achieve the same effect.
Dependence/addiction are easily distinguished: we're all dependent on friendship, but we're all addicted to oxygen.
You can live without the one but not the other.
HOW TO GET HELP ON DRUGS
Using drugs can be dangerous, especially when they're taken in excess or for a long time, or in the wrong combinations.
If you take drugs, you risk the following:
Overdose, which requires immediate medical attention
An overdose can happen sometimes because the quality of drugs that are produced illegally vary according to how much they have been "tampered" with to increase the profit to the dealer.
It can also happen due to build-up of tolerance, when you need more and more of a drug to get the same effect.
An overdose can cause mental disorders, fits, a coma or death.
Overdosing of prescribed drugs can be fatal.
Certain mixtures of drugs can be deadly, for example, alcohol plus barbiturates.
Dependence/addiction
The regular use of drugs can lead to a mental and physical craving for them.
Daily activities come to revolve around getting more drugs for the next dose.
All other needs, even basic ones, such as food and friends, become unimportant.
There is a narrow line between dependence and addiction.
Although there are many personal difficulties to be overcome when attempting to withdraw from drugs, it is possible.
Withdrawing from some drugs, such as barbiturates, are best dealt with in a situation where medical or specialist help is available.
Ill health
Drug abuse can lead to damage to main organs of the body, mental illness, malnutrition or death.
Drug abusers who inject themselves risk catching hepatitis (a serious blood disease) and many other infections, abscesses and even gangrene.
Some drugs lower your perception of pain.
Accidents
When drugs start to affect your mind, you will no longer be in control of all your actions.
This is when you are likely to have an accident.
You can become over-confident and take foolish risks.
If you drive, you can injure or kill yourself or others.
Unpleasant reactions during a "bad trip" can make you panic and act irrationally.
You may try to do things beyond your ability and get hurt.
If you use drugs you need to think about the following:
Legal problems
The use of some drugs is against the law.
If caught, offenders risk heavy fines or even imprisonment.
Arrest can mean embarrassment not only for you but for your family and friends.
It is difficult enough to get a job without having a criminal record.
Some drugs can lead to people committing crimes or behaving violently.
To drive under the influence of any drug is an offence — and is dangerous.
Money problems
Continued use of drugs can be expensive, costing hundreds or even thousands of pounds a year.
In order to pay for their drugs, many users get involved in crime including house breaking and male or female prostitution.
Many drug users steal even from their own families and best friends.
Drug trafficking is international big business and your money is their profit.
To make a profit, drug dealers sell you short measures or mix all sorts of dangerous materials in with drugs to give them a bigger share of the profits or to finance their own drug habits.
Personal problems
Relationships can be destroyed and friendships lost when you come to need drugs more than you need other people.
Young people who abuse drugs regularly often end up as very immature adults because they never learn to cope with their problems.
Hurting others
Arguments and problems because of drug abuse can lead to family disputes and breakdowns.
Some people, when they have taken drugs, become violent and assault others.
If you are pregnant, abuse of drugs could threaten your baby's health.
The newborn child can suffer from physical dependence, withdrawal symptoms or even serious birth defects.
Research has confirmed that women who continue to smoke and drink alcohol during pregnancy tend to produce smaller babies.
Drugs and the law
British drug laws cover many of the substances abused by young people.
The Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 is the basis of the present drug laws.
Anyone convicted of possession, supplying or producing drugs illegally could be imprisoned.
The police have the power to stop and search anyone if they have reasonable grounds to suspect that person is in possession of a controlled drug.
These powers of search without warrant also apply to vehicles.
Police in the possession of a search warrant, signed by a justice of the peace or a sheriff, are authorized to enter premises, if  necessary by force.
It is an offence to obstruct the police in their efforts to search for evidence of a drug offence.
In the drive to combat drug trafficking, anyone found with even a very small amount of an illegal drug can be charged by the police with the offence of "possession with intent to supply" .
This charge automatically takes the case to a higher court, which can impose the highest penalties.
Maximum penalties on indictment range from up to two years plus a fine for possession of class C drugs (e.g. mild stimulants, such as amphetamines) to fourteen years plus a fine for production and trafficking is class A drugs"(e.g. heroin, morphine, cocaine and LSD).
What to do if someone takes an overdose
1.
If they become very excited or anxious:
calm them down;— prevent them from doing themselves an injury;— don't leave them alone;— if they don't calm down, call an ambulance or doctor (dial 999).
2.
If they become unconscious:
put them in the "recovery position" (i.e. on the floor, face down, but with head bent back and face tilted down, making sure they can breathe easily);— call a doctor or ambulance immediately;— if you can, give details of the drug taken when you phone;— ask the ambulance operator if there is any first aid you can give;— stay with them, until help comes;— give them nothing to eat or drink.
How to recognize signs of drug abuse
Restlessness, exaggerated gestures, the appearance of being "drunk" , pinpoint or enlarged pupils of the eye, drowsiness , talkativeness or irrational behaviour.
Need help with a drug problem?
There are now many kinds of help available if you think you have a drug problem.
If you are desperate, you may contact:
1.
a doctor who will give advice and treatment and may refer you to a specialist drug-abuse centre for help;
2. drug-treatment centres and clinics who specialize in treating people with drug problems.
3. hospitals where treatment is sometimes given on an in-patient or out-patient basis;
4. social-work departments who offer practical help and advice and may refer clients to specialist helping agencies;
5.
Samaritans who will always assist you to get the help that is needed.
This is a 24-hour telephone service that helps anyone in despair.
The phone number is in the phone book or may be obtained by dialling the operator; or
6. college student counsellors who have been specially trained to talk you through your problem and who may then refer to a specialized agency that can offer you help, at minimum disruption to your course of studies.
For further information, help or advice, contact your local regional health board, city health board, district health council or community health education group.
Their addresses and phone numbers are listed in your local telephone directory or can be obtained from the directory enquiries operator by dialling 192.
17 Sex, love and dreams
Love between man and woman has many determinants, but instinct is not one of them.
Anthropologists have described entire societies in which love is absent, and there are many individuals in our society who have never loved.
To argue that such societies and individuals are "sick" or "the exception that proves the rule" (whatever that means) is sheer arrogance.
Love, when it exists, is a learned emotion.
Explanations for its current prevalence must be sought elsewhere than in the genes.
Lawrence Casler, "This Thing Called Love is Pathological" , Psychology Today, American Psychological Association, 1969
This chapter tries to do three things:
1.
Examine sexuality and sexual relationships in the context of late twentieth century college life.
2.
Explore the concept of love and identify some of its pitfalls.
3.
Help you make sense of your dreams.
SEXUAL RELATIONS AT COLLEGE
If you've worked your way conscientiously through all the preceding chapters, sorted out the roof over your head, sussed out the teaching staff, discovered your way round the library and begun to develop good study habits, you may well be forgiven for thinking you won't find much time or space or energy left for anything like sex or love.
Not so.
Though the three or four years of your student existence will seem in retrospect to have flown by, one of the delights of this period of your life is the way in which the days — and nights — really do expand to let you fit in nearly all the things you want to do — and more!
There will be those who argue that you're really at college to learn French or physics or economics.
That's less than half the story.
You can and should "learn to learn" and "learn to live" at one and the same time.
By combining these activities, you'll spend more of your life being a person than being merely a linguist, physicist or economist.
The first five years of life are critically important in shaping every person's unique individuality.
So too are some other periods — like the one you're about to embark upon.
You already know you'll be an intellectually different person at the end of your time at college.
This chapter encourages a similar degree of growth and awareness in your sexuality and your ability to create and to sustain good sexual relations with others.
You may not believe it, but yours is a privileged generation, For your grandparents, sex was a taboo subject, enclosed by walls of"Thou shall nots' and compounded by ignorance.
For your parents, in those heady days of the "swinging sixties" , permissiveness was the buzzword.
In practice, for most of us, neither of those places is a good place to be.
The sexual pendulum has now swung back to a more central position, and that's good news!
The first thing to be clear about is that sex is a natural instinct: we are born as sexual beings.
It's not a human characteristic which simply emerges at adolescence — though the changes associated with puberty tend to concentrate the mind powerfully on our sexuality at that stage.
However, learning about your own sexual nature and how to express your sexual feelings don't just come naturally — despite what popular songs may say.
The distinction is more clearly seen by analogy with breathing and eating: both are instinctive — yet, whilst nobody shows us how to breathe, learning to take sustenance is more problematic.
Sex is more like eating than breathing in this regard — and interestingly, the word "appetite" is often used in relation to both activities.
So, it's something we've got to learn about.
Maybe all we need is a manual — "Teach Yourself Sex" ?
No such luck: what makes sex much more complicated but also much more interesting and rewarding is  that every single one of us has to learn what it's all about for ourselves — as unique individuals.
Call it "heuristic learning" or "exploratory learning" or "learning by doing" — that's the only way forward.
For some of you, the moral position will already be clear-cut.
Your traditional culture, or your own religious beliefs, mean that for you, sexual experience, learning and growth will take place only within a  monogamous relationship, probably within the institution of marriage.
For others, the starting point will be very different — one night stands, so-called "recreational sex" .
Within our own dominant culture, probably more of the latter group will be men than women, though not exclusively so.
Like other gender differences, this too is becoming more blurred as both sexes become more liberated — that is, more free to express themselves as individuals in ways that are right for them.
Most of us, male and female, will find a place somewhere between the two ends of that continuum.
For all of us, the same general guidelines apply.
They are not there to help us avoid heartache or hurt — that's not possible for real, alive, relating human beings.
But, if followed, they will prevent us harming ourselves or others — not a bad guideline by which to live our lives.
The essential guidelines are simple:
1.
You don't ever have to do anything you don't want to.
2.
You should never be party to making anyone else do anything they don't want to.
3.
And this is really important — you should never, ever assume that you know better than they, what they want — and never let anyone else persuade you that they know better than you, what you want.
4.
You must keep within the law.
Remember that the age of heterosexual consent is now 16 in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland — but it may well be different in some other countries.
The age of homosexual consent (i.e. male homosexual behaviour in private) is now 21 in those four countries.
But homosexuality is unlawful in some other countries.
It's your moral and legal responsibility to find out what the law says and to comply with the law.
These guidelines don't mean you can't experiment and find out what feels right for you with another person.
Indeed, it's the only way you'll ever find out.
What it does mean, however, is that you retain the right both to say "no" and to have that "no" totally respected.
In terms of establishing what's right for you, you'll need to start by finding out about yourself.
You didn't set out to drive a car without knowing where the clutch is and what it does.
But successive generations of young people have embarked on their sexual  experimenting without knowing very much about themselves — their own bodies, what turns them on, how they function sexually — and knowing virtually nothing about their partners.
So examine, explore, get to know your own body first.
Don't be misled by the ludicrous images in pornography and the media.
You are you — there is no absolute to measure up against.
And then read and learn about the structure of the opposite sex and the ways in which he or she functions.
You may be fumbling in the dark — both literally and metaphorically -but you might as well know what it is you might find!
Next, before you find yourself in a situation you can't control you need to know about contraception and safe sex.
For there is a dilemma along the way — expressed so poignantly by the very young pregnant schoolgirl who, in response to the question: "But didn't they tell you about sex in school?" replied "Oh yes, they told me what to do — but nobody said how much I'd want to do it!" 
All of you reading this book know how to think.
Our society values thinkers and is quite good at training thinkers.
But we're also emotional beings, with feelings as well as thoughts.
Sometimes one aspect of our being has been developed at the expense of the other.
In my professional work, I repeatedly have conversations with educated clients — especially male clients — which go something like this: "Yes, yes — you've told me what you think, and what you did, but I wonder how you felt?" 
To which the response is so often a puzzled look and something along the lines of: "But I just don't know what I feel" .
In your sexual relations with other people, you need to be aware of more than the behavioural aspects.
You need to be in touch with the emotional content of the relationship.
How are you feeling?
And, just as important, how is your partner feeling?
Fear, embarrassment, anxiety — all, if unacknowledged, get in the way of a real, live relationship.
You need to be clear that for both of you what is going on is OK and creative of mutual satisfaction.
And for that you'll need to talk about and share your feelings.
For the moment though, in the cool light of day, I'm asking you to apply your highly developed thinking faculty to the twin issues of contraception and safe sex.
Contraception
Once again, let's be clear.This is not just the responsibility of the female partner.
Neither of you has any business bringing an unwanted "out of time" baby into the world.
The child and both of you deserve more than that.
So, make an appointment at your family planning clinic or go and talk to your college doctor.
It's never easy to decide these matters alone.
But it's much easier these days to get the best information on which to base your decision.
Make sure you do it now.
The actual choice of method is a very individual decision.
What suits you may not be right for others.
But remember, there's simply no excuse in this society, in the late twentieth century, for an unwanted pregnancy.
Safe sex
For sexually active people outside a long-term monogamous relationship, safe sex has always been important because of the danger of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs)— most commonly genital warts, syphilis and gonorrhoea.
Untreated, there are unpleasant implications for you, for future partners and future babies.
But, of course, they can be treated.
Make contact with the so-called "special clinic" (department of genito-urinary medicine) at your local hospital if you have any reason whatever to suspect that you may have contracted a venereal disease.
All treatment is absolutely confidential and free.
It goes without saying — so we'll say it — that STDs are best avoided in the first place by routine sexual hygiene and precautions.
If you're not sure what steps to take, go and talk to your doctor today.
What's highlighted the whole issue of safe sex is, of course, the advent of acquired immunity deficiency syndrome (AIDS).
AIDS is different — because at this stage of medical knowledge, it's treatable but not curable.
You become infected with the AIDS virus only through close intimate contact (involving an exchange of blood or semen) with a partner who is HIV positive — that is, carrying the human immuno-deficiency Virus that may develop, in some cases, into AIDS.
And only in that way.
Scares about glasses in pubs and communion cups are nonsense!
Again, there's plenty of detailed information about — from your student union, from your local citizens advice bureau, from your college clinic.
Once more, there's simply no excuse for ignorance.
After all, you don't want to die of AIDS — either during or after your college career.
Therefore, if you've been exposed to the possibility of infection and have puzzling symptoms, see your doctor at once.
If you have fears about being HIV Positive, see your college Counsellor.
There are complex issues to be considered in relation to the virus and you'll need professional help and expert guidance.
A sheath (condom, johnny, french letter, "Durex" ) plus a spermicide provides good protection for both partners against both unwanted disease and unwanted pregnancies.
Again, no excuses for being without — and that applies to women as well as men.
You've only got one body: it deserves to be looked after.
Thus informed and protected you are ready — but only if it seems right for you — to embark upon a sexual journey that will last in one  way or another for a life time.
For most people, the best companion as you set out is someone you feel you know, someone you trust, someone you feel safe with.
It's perfectly easy to take your clothes off — it's much harder to expose yourself emotionally, to render yourself vulnerable before another person — as you assuredly do in the expression of yourself and your needs in a sexual relationship.
You need to be confident, therefore, before you embark, that this is a good person for you to be with.
That way, the sexual expression is part of the security of a genuine and preferably exclusive — though not necessarily permanent — commitment to each other.
You may now have the chance of finding a sexual experience that involves not only the taking and/or giving of pleasure but one that involves you in "sharing the experience of pleasure" in a meaningful way for both of you.
Homosexual and bisexual students
For a proportion of students — as for other groupings of adults — the partner will be a same-sex partner.
For you, the journey is going to be  tougher.
In some countries, male homosexual practices are still illegal.
In England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, where that is no longer the case, the age of consent for male homosexual behaviour in private is 21 and not 16 as for heterosexual relationships.
(The law is silent on female homosexual behaviour.)
You will undoubtedly encounter prejudice, hostility and misunderstanding.
But my clinical experience tells me that for many of you, there's no choice — other than the possibility of celibacy — for as you've developed, you'll have gradually realised that your sexual orientation is homosexual and that you can no more change that than the colour of your eyes.
For others, it will be less straightforward.
The bisexuality within us all is presently unresolvable for you and it may take time to resolve itself.
Homosexual (both gay and lesbian) and bisexual young people may find the going less tough in the company of an experienced counsellor.
He or she won't tell you what to do — but will be alongside you (metaphorically) as you find your own way.
Mature students
You too may have a difficult path to tread.
Around you will be young people, with few responsibilities and seemingly unlimited possibilities.
You may already have commitments — to a family, to a partner.
Those children and that relationship will be affected, will be changed in both obvious and subtle ways by your decision to become a student.
The tensions can't be avoided and the ultimate outcome can't be predicted.
But forewarned, the difficulties can at least be acknowledged and discussed.
Again, if it becomes too difficult for you to deal with this problem alone, there are readily-available college counselling services.
You've probably sacrificed a lot to get to college — don't let unresolved personal difficulties sabotage it for you.
Disabled students
Finally, disabled students also face particular problems.
It should go without saying that your needs and expectations are the same as those of able-bodied students.
But physical disabilities can make it difficult for you to express your sexuality.
The best advice is to make contact with an organisation like SPOD (Sexual Problems of the Disabled).
They have a wealth of experience for you to draw upon.
THE AGONY AND THE ECSTASY OF LOVE
In the hothouse atmosphere of college, there'll be lots of opportunity for "falling in love" .
The very phrase suggests a headlong dash — which is certainly what it feels like.
There's not a lot of reason around when  you fall in love.
Often, in fact, you're responding to an unconscious pull towards that person which has little basis in reality.
What seems to be so compellingly attractive in that person is often a "projection" of a repressed part of your own personality.
So the quiet, reserved, studious girl falls"head over heels' in love with the most outrageous extrovert in the year!
Hardly surprising that it often "ends in tears" .
While it lasts, of course, it's both ecstasy and agony: totally obsessive — every waking moment — and some dreaming ones — full of him and her; delightful fantasies of what might perhaps be the actual realisation of some of those fantasies.
All this puts you in touch with the core of your "feeling being" .
Enjoy it while it lasts.
You'll look good, you'll feel good, and you'll have masses of energy as the adrenalin flows!
Two warnings:
1.
If you find you never get beyond the stage of "falling in love" or "being in love" and meeting the other as the real-life individual behind the projection, then you may need some help to look at what's happening and why.
2.
If you find in the longer run that the process of "being in love" stops you functioning properly (i.e. getting your college work done) that too is something you might need to look at with some skilled help (i.e. a skilled counsellor).
 "Being in love" and "being loved" are naturally the next stages.
By now, the fantasy has somewhat abated and some reality has entered the relationship.
You relate as two real adults who probably share values and attitudes, enjoy many of the same things, doing them together and who care about the well-being and happiness of one another.
And have lots of fun.
But it's not all plain sailing.
After a while, it may emerge that the man's experience and the woman's experience of that closeness are somehow very different.
For it sometimes seems that men and women inhabit different emotional worlds.
The conventional wisdom would be that "men are independent, women rather more dependent" .
Emotionally, nothing could be further from the truth.
And we don't need to look far for the explanation.
As children, we all need a significant adult on whom we can truly depend: in our culture, for both boys and girls, that person is likely to be a woman, usually the mother.
Men therefore learn to expect that their dependency needs will be met by a woman (now a mate rather than a mother but a female none the less).
But what about women?
They are essentially, though not necessarily explicitly, raised to be "depended upon" — to meet the  emotional needs of others.
(Why else are so many women in the caring professions?)
So, in essence, in order that the partnership can really start working emotionally for both partners, they must jointly seek to develop within the male partner the ability to nurture, and within the female the ability to recognise her own needs and to ask for them to be satisfied.
That all requires a considerable degree of maturity, honesty and commitment.
Now you see why I said that sex was the easy bit!
Next come all those variations on the theme of love which are intrinsically full of pain as well as pleasure:
Love which, for whatever reason, is destined to remain forever undeclared.
Love which is unrequited: however much you love somebody there's absolutely nothing you can do to "make" them love you.
Nothing: that's a particularly poignant kind of pain.
Love which is not going to be fulfilled.
Circumstances, many and various, may mean there's no way forward for that relationship.
Often, two individuals will sadly suffer their pain and loss alone, unable to share either the love or the suffering.
Love within a partnership in which, for one of you, the love is still there and yearning to grow and develop, whilst for the other, it's gone, it's over, it's finished.
All this, of course, falls within the range of normal experience, as you move through your early adulthood.
A very heady brew in the atmosphere of most colleges.
Each experience teaches you something more about yourself, your own needs and what you have to offer others.
And each experience helps you to mature emotionally.
Danger signals arise when the normal pain and unhappiness that accompanies all emotional growth enlarges to become a depression which you simply cannot shift, particularly if you feel (for more than a passing moment) that there's nothing left to live for — or if you realise in time that you've stopped being able to look after yourself.
At that stage, you must tell somebody how you feel: a fellow student, a tutor, a lady in the canteen — somebody.
Talk about your feelings with them and that will help you decide if you're going to need some professional help to come through this experience which is very common and in which you can be helped, no matter what you may feel at the time.
There is help available: we all need at some stage to avail ourselves of it.
It's just your turn this time!
And there may be those of you reading this who have a friend or colleague suffering in that way right now.
If so, you'll be wondering what you can do to intervene, to ease the pain.
What your suffering friend needs at such a time is to have you just listen, not to judge or to find the answer but to offer practical support if necessary.
But above  all, just to "be there" for them.
Don't forget, you may need them to be there for you, another time, another place!
MAKING SENSE OF YOUR DREAMS…
From the pain of love…to the world of dreams.
No, don't turn over, those of you about to say: "But I don't dream" .
You do, in fact, dream, for up to one fifth of the time you're asleep.
You just haven't developed the capacity to recall those dreams.
Being at college is a time of great activity for you — intellectual development, physical growth, psychological insight — so it's also a time when you may well experience particularly vivid dreams.
Wild dreams, troublesome dreams, Technicolour dreams.
Don't ignore them as an avenue for self discovery, for growth.
Freud call'd dreams "the royal road to the unconscious" .
So, if you really want to know what you're feeling and thinking in this new world of college, why not try to catch yourself dreaming?
First, there are different sorts of dreams.
For both men and women, there are erotic dreams — with feelings of acute arousal which for men (less often for women) may sometimes culminate in involuntary orgasm ("wet dreams').
Then, as students, you may be familiar with "the examination dream" — of sitting and taking an examination or a test which you've already taken and passed.
Perhaps an additional reassurance that you can in fact pass your future examinations!
Other types of dream worth mentioning are:
Traumatic dreams — which involve the reliving of some trauma — such as an accident, a mugging, or a sexual assault.
No need of explanation here.
These dreams usually fade in time and then die away.
Importantly, they may in fact be helping you come to terms with the traumatic experience.
Anxiety dreams — which again need little explanation.
We've all had such dreams — in which we find ourselves wearing the wrong clothes, in the wrong place, at the wrong time, missing the train, etc.
Anxiety is part of our daily life.
However, constant experiencing of anxiety dreams might suggest a waking life out of balance, a need for some adjustment.
(See also Chapter 18 on managing stress.)
Recurrent dreams — with which many of us are familiar.
These dreams are usually evidence of some unresolved problem or dilemma.
The imagery might be such that you can work it out for yourself (e.g. always in pursuit of a partner but never quite catching him or her!).
Wish fulfilment dreams — they're the ones where you actually get to catch that partner — useful of course if you hadn't previously acknowledged to your waking self who it is you're pursuing in your unconscious mind!
Finally, of course, come nightmares.
Strictly speaking, these refer to dreams where you are pursued and eventually overpowered by a monster.
More commonly, the term is now used to describe any really frightening dream.
Nightmares are not normally experienced by adults in good health, though we may all experience one occasionally.
If you find yourself prey to regular bad night terrors, it might be worthwhile talking the problem through with a counsellor, trained in dream analysis, to look at the imagery and try to discover what the messages are for you, what your fears are all about.
So, how can you work with your dreams in such a way as to make useful links between your conscious and your unconscious mind, and so gain some benefit in your everyday life?
1.
You have to recall the dream.
On waking, try staying in bed on waking for a few minutes and let your mind try to recall.
Don't force it — let it do the work.
Most people find they can improve their recall of dreams with practice.
It's mostly a question of wanting to do so!
2.
Keep a pen and paper by the bed (or a tape recorder).
Try to record anything you can remember — details, a feeling, colours, even an odd word can sometimes trigger the total memory of a dream.
3.
When you've captured your dream, what then?
Certainly not a routine interpretation of certain symbols attached to specific meanings.
Your dream is a personal experience.
Only you can look for associations, explanations and seek amplification of what it was your unconscious mind was trying to communicate to you while you slept — and dreamed.
By investing some time and trouble in learning to capture and interpret your own dreams, you may well gain insight into those aspects of your life that we've been discussing throughout this chapter — some of your needs as living, loving, sexual being, surviving, as we all must, in complex relationships with other people.